--- START DOCUMENT: cip-009-6.pdf ---
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
2. Number: CIP-009-6
3. Purpose: To recover reliability functions performed by BES Cyber Systems by
specifying recovery plan requirements in support of the continued
stability, operability, and reliability of the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional entity
or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities, systems,
and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load shedding
(UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme where the
Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Interchange Coordinator or Interchange Authority
4.1.6 Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
4.1.7 Transmission Operator
4.1.8 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above
are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or restoration
of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme where the
Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-009-6:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security Perimeters.
4.2.3.3 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R.
Section 73.54.
Page 2 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
4.2.3.4 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not included
in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber Systems
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the CIP-002-5.1
identification and categorization processes.
5. Effective Dates:
See Implementation Plan for CIP-009-6.
6. Background:
Standard CIP-009 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber security,
which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems and
require a minimum level of organizational, operational, and procedural controls to
mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements.
An entity should include as much as it believes necessary in their documented
processes, but they must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident
response plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an
approach involving multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the
standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training
program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be
referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any
additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
Page 3 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented processes.
These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk
Electric System. A review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability
standards for UFLS program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of
300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems
to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management
Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact
and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used in the
“Applicable Systems” column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at Control Centers – Only applies to BES Cyber
Systems located at a Control Center and categorized as medium impact according
to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization processes.
• Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced high
impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples include,
but are not limited to firewalls, authentication servers, and log monitoring and
alerting systems.
• Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access Control
System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium
impact BES Cyber System with External Routable Connectivity.
Page 4 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more documented recovery plan(s) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-009-6 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M1. Evidence must include the documented recovery plan(s) that collectively include the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
009-6 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications.
CIP-009-6 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Conditions for activation of the recovery An example of evidence may include, but
associated: plan(s). is not limited to, one or more plans that
1. EACMS; and include language identifying conditions
for activation of the recovery plan(s).
2. PACS
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Roles and responsibilities of responders. An example of evidence may include, but
associated: is not limited to, one or more recovery
1. EACMS; and plans that include language identifying
the roles and responsibilities of
2. PACS
responders.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Page 5 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-6 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes for the backup An example of evidence may include, but
associated: and storage of information required to is not limited to, documentation of
1. EACMS; and recover BES Cyber System functionality. specific processes for the backup and
storage of information required to
2. PACS
recover BES Cyber System functionality.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes to verify the An example of evidence may include, but
associated: successful completion of the backup is not limited to, logs, workflow or other
1. EACMS; and processes in Part 1.3 and to address any documentation confirming that the
backup failures. backup process completed successfully
2. PACS
and backup failures, if any, were
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
addressed.
Control Centers and their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes to preserve data, An example of evidence may include, but
associated: per Cyber Asset capability, for is not limited to, procedures to preserve
1. EACMS; and determining the cause of a Cyber data, such as preserving a corrupted drive
Security Incident that triggers activation or making a data mirror of the system
2. PACS
of the recovery plan(s). Data before proceeding with recovery.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
preservation should not impede or
their associated:
restrict recovery.
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Page 6 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement its documented recovery plan(s) to collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-009-6 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning and Real-time Operations.]
M2. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates implementation of each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-009-6 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing.
CIP-009-6 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Test each of the recovery plans referenced An example of evidence may include, but
associated: in Requirement R1 at least once every 15 is not limited to, dated evidence of a test
1. EACMS; and calendar months: (by recovering from an actual incident,
with a paper drill or tabletop exercise, or
2. PACS
• By recovering from an actual incident;
with an operational exercise) of the
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
• With a paper drill or tabletop exercise; recovery plan at least once every 15
Control Centers and their associated:
or calendar months. For the paper drill or
1. EACMS; and
full operational exercise, evidence may
• With an operational exercise.
2. PACS include meeting notices, minutes, or other
records of exercise findings.
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Test a representative sample of An example of evidence may include,
their associated: information used to recover BES Cyber but is not limited to, operational logs
1. EACMS; and System functionality at least once or test results with criteria for testing
every 15 calendar months to ensure the usability (e.g. sample tape load,
2. PACS
that the information is useable and is browsing tape contents) and
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
compatible with current compatibility with current system
Control Centers and their associated:
configurations. configurations (e.g. manual or
1. EACMS; and
automated comparison checkpoints
2. PACS
between backup media contents and
An actual recovery that incorporates
current configuration).
the information used to recover BES
Cyber System functionality substitutes
for this test.
Page 7 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-6 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems Test each of the recovery plans Examples of evidence may include, but
referenced in Requirement R1 at least are not limited to, dated
once every 36 calendar months documentation of:
through an operational exercise of the
• An operational exercise at least
recovery plans in an environment
once every 36 calendar months
representative of the production
between exercises, that
environment.
demonstrates recovery in a
An actual recovery response may representative environment; or
substitute for an operational exercise.
• An actual recovery response that
occurred within the 36 calendar
month timeframe that exercised
the recovery plans.
Page 8 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall maintain each of its recovery plan(s) in accordance with each of the applicable requirement parts
in CIP-009-6 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon:
Operations Assessment].
M3. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-009-6 Table R3 – Recovery
Plan Review, Update and Communication.
CIP-009-6 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their No later than 90 calendar days after An example of evidence may include, but
associated: completion of a recovery plan test or actual is not limited to, all of the following:
1. EACMS; and recovery:
1. Dated documentation of identified
2. PACS
3.1.1. Document any lessons learned deficiencies or lessons learned for
associated with a recovery plan each recovery plan test or actual
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
test or actual recovery or incident recovery or dated
Control Centers and their associated:
document the absence of any documentation stating there were
1. EACMS; and
lessons learned; no lessons learned;
2. PACS
3.1.2. Update the recovery plan based on 2. Dated and revised recovery plan
any documented lessons learned showing any changes based on the
associated with the plan; and lessons learned; and
3.1.3. Notify each person or group with a 3. Evidence of plan update
defined role in the recovery plan of distribution including, but not
the updates to the recovery plan limited to:
based on any documented lessons • Emails;
learned.
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system;
or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 9 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-6 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their No later than 60 calendar days after a An example of evidence may include, but
associated: change to the roles or responsibilities, is not limited to, all of the following:
1. EACMS; and responders, or technology that the
1. Dated and revised recovery plan
Responsible Entity determines would
2. PACS
with changes to the roles or
impact the ability to execute the recovery
responsibilities, responders, or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
plan:
technology; and
Control Centers and their associated:
3.2.1. Update the recovery plan; and
1. EACMS; and
2. Evidence of plan update
2. PACS 3.2.2. Notify each person or group with a distribution including, but not
defined role in the recovery plan of limited to:
the updates.
• Emails;
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution
system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 10 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means
NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance
with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required to
retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence
retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask
an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since
the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified below
unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as part of an
investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard for three
calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the non-
compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time specified above,
whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent audit
records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
Compliance Audits
Self-Certifications
Spot Checking
Compliance Investigations
Self-Reporting
Complaints
1.4. Additional Compliance Information:
None
Page 11 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
2. Table of Compliance Elements
Time Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-6)
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Long-term Medium N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has developed recovery has developed recovery has not created
plan(s), but the plan(s) plan(s), but the plan(s) recovery plan(s) for BES
do not address one of do not address two of Cyber Systems.
the requirements the requirements OR
included in Parts 1.2 included in Parts 1.2 The Responsible Entity
through 1.5. through 1.5. has created recovery
plan(s) for BES Cyber
Systems, but the
plan(s) does not
address the conditions
for activation in Part
1.1.
OR
The Responsible Entity
has created recovery
plan(s) for BES Cyber
Systems, but the
plan(s) does not
address three or more
of the requirements in
Parts 1.2 through 1.5.
R2 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has not tested the has not tested the has not tested the has not tested the
Real-time recovery plan(s) recovery plan(s) recovery plan(s) recovery plan(s)
Operations according to R2 Part within 16 calendar according to R2 Part according to R2 Part
2.1 within 15 calendar months, not exceeding 2.1 within 17 calendar 2.1 within 18 calendar
months, not 17 calendar months months, not months between tests
exceeding 16 calendar between tests of the exceeding 18 calendar of the plan. (2.1)
months between tests plan. (2.1) months between tests OR
of the plan. (2.1) OR of the plan. (2.1) The Responsible Entity
OR The Responsible Entity OR has not tested a
has not tested a representative sample
Page 12 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Time Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-6)
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity representative sample The Responsible Entity of the information
has not tested a of the information has not tested a used in the recovery of
representative sample used in the recovery representative sample BES Cyber System
of the information of BES Cyber System of the information functionality according
used in the recovery functionality according used in the recovery of to R2 Part 2.2 within
of BES Cyber System to R2 Part 2.2 within BES Cyber System 18 calendar months
functionality 16 calendar months, functionality according between tests. (2.2)
according to R2 Part not exceeding 17 to R2 Part 2.2 within OR
2.2 within 15 calendar calendar months 17 calendar months, The Responsible Entity
months, not between tests. (2.2) not exceeding 18 has not tested the
exceeding 16 calendar OR calendar months recovery plan(s)
months between The Responsible Entity between tests. (2.2) according to R2 Part
tests. (2.2) has not tested the OR 2.3 within 39 calendar
OR recovery plan The Responsible Entity months between tests
The Responsible Entity according to R2 Part has not tested the of the plan. (2.3)
has not tested the 2.3 within 37 calendar recovery plan
recovery plan months, not exceeding according to R2 Part
according to R2 Part 38 calendar months 2.3 within 38 calendar
2.3 within 36 calendar between tests. (2.3) months, not
months, not exceeding 39 calendar
exceeding 37 calendar months between
months between tests. (2.3)
tests. (2.3)
R3 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Assessment has not notified each has not updated the has neither has neither
person or group with a recovery plan(s) based documented lessons documented lessons
defined role in the on any documented learned nor learned nor
recovery plan(s) of lessons learned within documented the documented the
updates within 90 and 90 and less than 120 absence of any lessons absence of any lessons
less than 120 calendar calendar days of each learned within 90 and learned within 120
days of the update recovery plan test or less than 120 calendar calendar days of each
being completed. actual recovery. (3.1.2) days of each recovery recovery plan test or
(3.1.3) OR plan test or actual actual recovery. (3.1.1)
The Responsible Entity recovery. (3.1.1)
has not notified each OR
Page 13 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Time Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-6)
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
person or group with a The Responsible Entity
defined role in the has not updated the
recovery plan(s) of recovery plan(s) based
updates within 120 on any documented
calendar days of the lessons learned within
update being 120 calendar days of
completed. (3.1.3) each recovery plan test
OR or actual recovery.
The Responsible Entity (3.1.2)
has not updated the OR
recovery plan(s) or The Responsible Entity
notified each person or has not updated the
group with a defined recovery plan(s) or
role within 60 and less notified each person or
than 90 calendar days group with a defined
of any of the following role within 90 calendar
changes that the days of any of the
responsible entity following changes that
determines would the responsible entity
impact the ability to determines would
execute the plan: (3.2) impact the ability to
• Roles or execute the plan: (3.2)
responsibilities, or • Roles or
• Responders, or responsibilities, or
• Technology changes. • Responders, or
• Technology changes.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None
Page 14 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements
and to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or
system from service in order to perform
testing, in response to FERC order issued
September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP standards
and to revise
format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-009-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed FERC
directives from
Order No. 791
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-009-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
Page 15 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Section 4 – Scope of Applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Standards
Section “4. Applicability” of the standards provides important information for Responsible Entities to
determine the scope of the applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Requirements.
Section “4.1. Functional Entities” is a list of NERC functional entities to which the standard applies. If the
entity is registered as one or more of the functional entities listed in Section 4.1, then the NERC CIP
Cyber Security Standards apply. Note that there is a qualification in Section 4.1 that restricts the
applicability in the case of Distribution Providers to only those that own certain types of systems and
equipment listed in 4.2.
Section “4.2. Facilities” defines the scope of the Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by the
Responsible Entity, as qualified in Section 4.1, that is subject to the requirements of the standard. As
specified in the exemption section 4.2.3.5, this standard does not apply to Responsible Entities that do
not have High Impact or Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems under CIP-002-5.1’s categorization. In
addition to the set of BES Facilities, Control Centers, and other systems and equipment, the list includes
the set of systems and equipment owned by Distribution Providers. While the NERC Glossary term
“Facilities” already includes the BES characteristic, the additional use of the term BES here is meant to
reinforce the scope of applicability of these Facilities where it is used, especially in this applicability
scoping section. This in effect sets the scope of Facilities, systems, and equipment that is subject to the
standards.
Requirement R1:
The following guidelines are available to assist in addressing the required components of a recovery
plan:
• NERC, Security Guideline for the Electricity Sector: Continuity of Business Processes and Operations
Operational Functions, September 2011, online at
http://www.nerc.com/docs/cip/sgwg/Continuity%20of%20Business%20and%20Operational%20Fu
nctions%20FINAL%20102511.pdf
• National Institute of Standards and Technology, Contingency Planning Guide for Federal
Information Systems, Special Publication 800-34 revision 1, May 2010, online at
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-34-rev1/sp800-34-rev1_errata-Nov11-2010.pdf
The term recovery plan is used throughout this Reliability Standard to refer to a documented set of
instructions and resources needed to recover reliability functions performed by BES Cyber Systems. The
recovery plan may exist as part of a larger business continuity or disaster recovery plan, but the term
does not imply any additional obligations associated with those disciplines outside of the Requirements.
A documented recovery plan may not be necessary for each applicable BES Cyber System. For example,
the short-term recovery plan for a BES Cyber System in a specific substation may be managed on a daily
basis by advanced power system applications such as state estimation, contingency and remedial action,
and outage scheduling. One recovery plan for BES Cyber Systems should suffice for several similar
facilities such as those found in substations or power plants.
Page 16 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
For Part 1.1, the conditions for activation of the recovery plan should consider viable threats to the BES
Cyber System such as natural disasters, computing equipment failures, computing environment failures,
and Cyber Security Incidents. A business impact analysis for the BES Cyber System may be useful in
determining these conditions.
For Part 1.2, entities should identify the individuals required for responding to a recovery operation of
the applicable BES Cyber System.
For Part 1.3, entities should consider the following types of information to recover BES Cyber System
functionality:
1. Installation files and media;
2. Current backup tapes and any additional documented configuration settings;
3. Documented build or restoration procedures; and
4. Cross site replication storage.
For Part 1.4, the processes to verify the successful completion of backup processes should include
checking for: (1) usability of backup media, (2) logs or inspection showing that information from current,
production system could be read, and (3) logs or inspection showing that information was written to the
backup media. Test restorations are not required for this Requirement Part. The following backup
scenarios provide examples of effective processes to verify successful completion and detect any backup
failures:
• Periodic (e.g. daily or weekly) backup process – Review generated logs or job status reports and set
up notifications for backup failures.
• Non-periodic backup process– If a single backup is provided during the commissioning of the
system, then only the initial and periodic (every 15 months) testing must be done. Additional
testing should be done as necessary and can be a part of the configuration change management
program.
• Data mirroring – Configure alerts on the failure of data transfer for an amount of time specified by
the entity (e.g. 15 minutes) in which the information on the mirrored disk may no longer be useful
for recovery.
• Manual configuration information – Inspect the information used for recovery prior to storing
initially and periodically (every 15 months). Additional inspection should be done as necessary and
can be a part of the configuration change management program.
The plan must also include processes to address backup failures. These processes should specify the
response to failure notifications or other forms of identification.
For Part 1.5, the recovery plan must include considerations for preservation of data to determine the
cause of a Cyber Security Incident. Because it is not always possible to initially know if a Cyber Security
Incident caused the recovery activation, the data preservation procedures should be followed until such
point a Cyber Security Incident can be ruled out. CIP-008 addresses the retention of data associated with
a Cyber Security Incident.
Page 17 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Requirement R2:
A Responsible Entity must exercise each BES Cyber System recovery plan every 15 months. However,
this does not necessarily mean that the entity must test each plan individually. BES Cyber Systems that
are numerous and distributed, such as those found at substations, may not require an individual
recovery plan and the associated redundant facilities since reengineering and reconstruction may be the
generic response to a severe event. Conversely, there is typically one control center per bulk
transmission service area that requires a redundant or backup facility. Because of these differences, the
recovery plans associated with control centers differ a great deal from those associated with power
plants and substations.
A recovery plan test does not necessarily cover all aspects of a recovery plan and failure scenarios, but
the test should be sufficient to ensure the plan is up to date and at least one restoration process of the
applicable cyber systems is covered.
Entities may use an actual recovery as a substitute for exercising the plan every 15 months. Otherwise,
entities must exercise the plan with a paper drill, tabletop exercise, or operational exercise. For more
specific types of exercises, refer to the FEMA Homeland Security Exercise and Evaluation Program
(HSEEP). It lists the following four types of discussion-based exercises: seminar, workshop, tabletop,
and games. In particular, it defines that, “A tabletop exercise involves key personnel discussing
simulated scenarios in an informal setting. [Table top exercises (TTX)] can be used to assess plans,
policies, and procedures.”
The HSEEP lists the following three types of operations-based exercises: Drill, functional exercise, and
full-scale exercise. It defines that, “[A] full-scale exercise is a multi-agency, multi-jurisdictional, multi-
discipline exercise involving functional (e.g., joint field office, Emergency operation centers, etc.) and
‘boots on the ground’ response (e.g., firefighters decontaminating mock victims).”
For Part 2.2, entities should refer to the backup and storage of information required to recover BES
Cyber System functionality in Requirement Part 1.3. This provides additional assurance that the
information will actually recover the BES Cyber System as necessary. For most complex computing
equipment, a full test of the information is not feasible. Entities should determine the representative
sample of information that provides assurance in the processes for Requirement Part 1.3. The test must
include steps for ensuring the information is useable and current. For backup media, this can include
testing a representative sample to make sure the information can be loaded, and checking the content
to make sure the information reflects the current configuration of the applicable Cyber Assets.
Requirement R3:
This requirement ensures entities maintain recovery plans. There are two requirement parts that trigger
plan updates: (1) lessons learned and (2) organizational or technology changes.
The documentation of lessons learned is associated with each recovery activation, and it involves the
activities as illustrated in Figure 1, below. The deadline to document lessons learned starts after the
completion of the recovery operation in recognition that complex recovery activities can take a few days
or weeks to complete. The process of conducting lessons learned can involve the recovery team
discussing the incident to determine gaps or areas of improvement within the plan. It is possible to have
Page 18 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
a recovery activation without any documented lessons learned. In such cases, the entity must retain
documentation of the absence of any lessons learned associated with the recovery activation.
4/14
1/1 - 1/14
Complete Plan
Recovery operation
Update Activities
(Actual or Exercise)
1/1 - 1/14 1/14 - 4/14
Incident Document Lessons Learned, Update Plan, and Distribute Updates
1/1 4/14
Figure 1: CIP-009-6 R3 Timeline
The activities necessary to complete the lessons learned include updating the plan and distributing those
updates. Entities should consider meeting with all of the individuals involved in the recovery and
documenting the lessons learned as soon after the recovery activation as possible. This allows more time
for making effective updates to the plan, obtaining any necessary approvals, and distributing those
updates to the recovery team.
The plan change requirement is associated with organization and technology changes referenced in the
plan and involves the activities illustrated in Figure 2, below. Organizational changes include changes to
the roles and responsibilities people have in the plan or changes to the response groups or individuals.
This may include changes to the names or contact information listed in the plan. Technology changes
affecting the plan may include referenced information sources, communication systems, or ticketing
systems.
1/1 3/1
Organization and Complete Plan
Technology Changes Update Activities
1/1 - 3/1
Update Plan and Distribute Updates
1/1 3/1
Figure 2: Timeline for Plan Changes in 3.2
When notifying individuals of response plan changes, entities should keep in mind that recovery plans
may be considered BES Cyber System Information, and they should take the appropriate measures to
prevent unauthorized disclosure of recovery plan information. For example, the recovery plan itself, or
other sensitive information about the recovery plan, should be redacted from Email or other
unencrypted transmission.
Rationale:
Page 19 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
During development of this standard, text boxes were embedded within the standard to explain the
rationale for various parts of the standard. Upon BOT approval, the text from the rationale text boxes
was moved to this section.
Rationale for Requirement R1:
Preventative activities can lower the number of incidents, but not all incidents can be prevented. A
preplanned recovery capability is, therefore, necessary for rapidly recovering from incidents, minimizing
loss and destruction, mitigating the weaknesses that were exploited, and restoring computing services
so that planned and consistent recovery action to restore BES Cyber System functionality occurs.
Rationale for Requirement R2:
The implementation of an effective recovery plan mitigates the risk to the reliable operation of the BES
by reducing the time to recover from various hazards affecting BES Cyber Systems. This requirement
ensures continued implementation of the response plans.
Requirement Part 2.2 provides further assurance in the information (e.g. backup tapes, mirrored hot-
sites, etc.) necessary to recover BES Cyber Systems. A full test is not feasible in most instances due to the
amount of recovery information, and the Responsible Entity must determine a sampling that provides
assurance in the usability of the information.
Rationale for Requirement R3:
To improve the effectiveness of BES Cyber System recovery plan(s) following a test, and to ensure the
maintenance and distribution of the recovery plan(s). Responsible Entities achieve this by (i) performing
a lessons learned review in 3.1 and (ii) revising the plan in 3.2 based on specific changes in the
organization or technology that would impact plan execution. In both instances when the plan needs to
change, the Responsible Entity updates and distributes the plan.
Page 20 of 20
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-009-6.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-005-8.pdf ---
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
2. Number: CIP-005-8
3. Purpose: To protect BES Cyber Systems (BCS) against compromise by permitting
only known and controlled communication to reduce the likelihood of
misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
Page 1 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-005-8:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
Page 2 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to
one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BCS
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the
CIP-002 identification and categorization processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to define
the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Date: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan.”
Page 3 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Applicable Systems connected to a Examples of evidence may include, but is
network via a routable protocol must be not limited to, a list of all ESPs with all
Medium impact BCS and their associated
protected by an ESP. uniquely identifiable applicable Cyber
PCA
Systems connected via a routable protocol
within each ESP.
1.2 High impact BCS with ERC and their Permit only needed routable protocol Examples of evidence may include, but are
associated PCA communications, documenting the not limited to, documentation that
reason, and deny all other routable includes the configuration of system and
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
protocol communications, through the documented reason, such as:
associated PCA
ESP; excluding time sensitive
• Electronic Access Point (EAP)
communications of Protection Systems.
configuration;
• Network infrastructure
configuration (e.g., technical
policies, ACL, VLAN, VXLAN, MPLS,
VRF, multi-context, or multi-
tenant environment); or
• SCI configuration or settings (e.g.,
technical policies, hypervisor,
fabric, back-plane, or SAN
configuration).
Page 4 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 SCI supporting an Applicable System from Protect ESP and SCI configurations by Examples of evidence may include, but are
Part 1.1. implementing methods to permit only not limited to, documentation of the
needed network accessibility to methods implemented to permit only
EACMS, and their supporting SCI, that
Management Interfaces of Applicable needed network accessibility to
control an ESP for an Applicable System in
Systems, per system capability. Management Interfaces, including
Part 1.1
documented reasons such as:
• Logical configuration or settings
(e.g., technical Policies, ACL, VLAN,
VXLAN, MPLS, VRF, multi-context,
or multi-tenant environment);
• Physically isolated or out-of-band
network for dedicated
Management Interfaces; or
• SCI configuration or settings
showing the isolation of the
Management Interfaces (e.g.,
technical policies, hypervisor, fabric
back-plane, or SAN configuration).
1.4 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Perform authentication when establishing Examples of evidence may include, but are
Dial-up Connectivity with Applicable not limited to, configuration, settings, or
Medium impact BCS and their associated
Systems, if any, and per system capability. documented process that describes how
PCA
the Responsible Entity is providing
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this authenticated access through each dial-up
Part connection.
1.5 High impact BCS Have one or more methods for detecting An example of evidence may include, but
known or suspected malicious routable is not limited to, documentation that
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers
protocol communications entering or malicious routable protocol
leaving an ESP. communications detection methods (e.g.,
intrusion detection system, application
layer firewall, etc.) are implemented.
Page 5 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.6 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Protect the data traversing Examples of evidence may include, but are
communication links used to span a single not limited to, documentation of methods
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers
ESP between PSPs through the use of: used to protect the confidentiality and
and their associated PCA
integrity of the data, such as:
• Confidentiality and integrity
controls, or • Configurations or settings used to
enforce encryption; or
• Physical controls that restrict
access to the cabling and other • The physical access restrictions
non-programmable (e.g., cabling and components
communication components in secured through conduit or
those instances when such cabling secured cable trays).
and components are located
outside of a PSP,
Excluding:
i. Real-time Assessment and
Real-time monitoring data
while being transmitted
between Control Centers
subject to CIP-012; and
ii. Time-sensitive communication
of Protection Systems.
Page 6 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts, per system capability, in CIP-005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M2. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively address each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the
Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Permit Interactive Remote Access (IRA), if Examples of evidence may include, but
any, only through an Intermediate are not limited to, network diagrams,
Medium impact BCS and their associated
System. architecture documents, configuration,
PCA
or settings that show all IRA is through an
SCI supporting an Applicable System in Intermediate System.
this Part
2.2 Intermediate System(s) used to access an Protect the confidentiality and integrity Examples of evidence may include, but
Applicable System in Part 2.1 of IRA communications between the are not limited to, architecture
initiating Cyber Asset or Virtual Cyber documents, configuration or settings
Asset and the Intermediate System. detailing where confidentiality and
integrity controls (e.g., encryption)
initiate and terminate.
2.3 Intermediate System(s) used to access an Require multi-factor authentication to Example of evidence may include, but are
Applicable System in Part 2.1 the Intermediate System for IRA not limited to, architecture documents,
communications between the initiating configuration or settings detailing the
Cyber Asset or Virtual Cyber Asset and authentication factors used.
the Intermediate System.
Examples of authenticators may include,
but are not limited to,
• Something the individual knows
such as passwords or PINs. This
does not include User ID;
Page 7 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
• Something the individual has
such as tokens, digital
certificates, or smart cards; or
• Something the individual is such
as fingerprints, iris scans, or
other biometric characteristics.
2.4 High impact BCS and their associated Have one or more methods for Examples of evidence may include,
PCA determining active vendor remote access but are not limited to, documentation
sessions (including IRA and system-to- of the methods used to determine
Medium impact BCS and their associated
system remote access). active vendor remote access,
PCA
including IRA and system-to-system
SCI supporting an Applicable System in remote access, such as:
this Part
• Methods for accessing logged or
monitoring information to
determine active vendor remote
access sessions;
• Methods for monitoring activity
(e.g., connection tables or rule hit
counters in a firewall, or user
activity monitoring) or open ports
(e.g., netstat or related commands
to display currently active ports)
to determine active system to
system remote access sessions; or
• Methods that control vendor
initiation of remote access such as
vendors calling and requesting a
second factor in order to initiate
remote access.
2.5 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include,
Page 8 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
disable active vendor remote access but are not limited to, documentation
Medium impact BCS and their associated
(including IRA and system-to-system of the methods(s) used to disable
PCA
remote access). active vendor remote access
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
• (including IRA and system-to-
this Part
system remote access).
2.6 Intermediate System(s) used to access an Prevent Intermediate System(s) from Examples of evidence may include, but
Applicable System in Part 2.1 sharing CPU resources and memory are not limited to, documentation that
resources with any part of a high or includes the following:
medium impact BCS or associated PCAs.
• Intermediate System architecture;
or
• Configuration or settings of each
Intermediate System and
supporting Cyber Systems.
2.7 Intermediate System(s) used to access an Routable protocol communications from Examples of evidence may include, but
Applicable System in Part 2.1 an Intermediate System to a high or are not limited to, documentation that
medium impact BCS or associated PCAs includes the following:
must be through an ESP.
• Network diagrams of Intermediate
Systems architecture;
or
• Configuration, settings, or policy
of the EAP which controls routable
protocol communications of IRA
through the ESP.
Page 9 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-005-8 Table R3 –Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS, PACS, and SCI. [Violation Risk
Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M3. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively address each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
005-8 Table R3 – Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS, PACS, and SCI and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-8 Table R3 – Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS, PACS, and SCI
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 EACMS and PACS associated with high Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include, but
impact BCS. determine authenticated vendor- are not limited to, documentation of the
initiated remote connections. methods used to determine
EACMS and PACS associated with
authenticated vendor-initiated remote
medium impact BCS with ERC.
connections, such as:
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
• Methods for accessing logged or
this Part .
monitoring information to
determine authenticated vendor-
initiated remote connections.
3.2 EACMS and PACS associated with high Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include, but
impact BCS. terminate authenticated vendor-initiated are not limited to, documentation of the
remote connections and control the methods(s) used to terminate
EACMS and PACS associated with
ability to reconnect. authenticated vendor-initiated remote
medium impact BCS with ERC.
connections to applicable
SCI supporting an Applicable System in systems. Examples include terminating
this Part. an active vendor-initiated
shell/process/session or dropping an
active vendor-initiated connection in a
firewall. Methods to control the ability to
reconnect, if necessary, could
be: disabling an Active Directory account;
disabling a security token; restricting IP
addresses from vendor sources in a
firewall; or physically disconnecting a
network cable to prevent a reconnection.
Page 10 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated
by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of
monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable
Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to
provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-time period
since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 11 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
have a method for detecting document one or more
known or suspected malicious processes for CIP-005-8 Table
routable protocol R1 – Electronic Security
communications entering or Perimeter. (R1)
leaving the ESP required by
OR
Part 1.5.
The Responsible Entity did not
OR
protect the Applicable Systems
The Responsible Entity did not connected to the network with
document the reason for routable protocol with an ESP.
permitting communications. (Part 1.1)
(Part 1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
permit only needed
communications and deny all
other communications,
through the ESP; excluding
time sensitive communications
of Protection Systems. (Part
1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
protect ESP and SCI
configurations by
implementing methods to
permit only needed network
accessibility to Management
Interfaces for Applicable
Page 12 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Systems per system capability.
(Part 1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
perform authentication when
establishing Dial-up
Connectivity with the
Applicable Systems. (Part 1.4)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement a method to
protect the data traversing
communication links, used to
span a single ESP between
PSPs, as required by Part 1.6.
R2. The Responsible Entity does The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not have documented implement processes for one implement processes for two implement processes for three
processes for one or more of of the applicable Requirement of the applicable Requirement of the applicable Requirement
the applicable Requirement Parts 2.1 through 2.3. Parts 2.1 through 2.3. Parts 2.1 through 2.3.
Parts 2.1 through 2.3.
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did
not have either: one or more not have one or more
method(s) for determining method(s) for determining
active vendor remote access active vendor remote access
sessions (including IRA and sessions (including IRA and
system-to-system remote system-to-system remote
access) (Part 2.4); or one or access) (Part 2.4) and one or
more methods to disable more methods to disable
active vendor remote access active vendor remote access
Page 13 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
(including IRA and system-to- (including IRA and system-to-
system remote access) (Part system remote access) (Part
2.5). 2.5).
OR
The Responsible Entity did
not prevent Intermediate
System(s) from sharing CPU
resources or memory
resources with any part of
a high or medium impact
BCS or associated PCAs.
(Part 2.6).
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
ensure routable protocol
communications from an
Intermediate System to high or
medium impact BCS or
associated PCAs went through
an ESP (Part 2.7).
R3. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
document one or more have a method to determine implement processes for implement any processes for
processes for CIP-005-8 Table authenticated vendor-initiated either Part 3.1 or Part 3.2. CIP-005-8 Table R3 – Vendor
R3 – Vendor Remote Access remote connections for PACS (Requirement R3) Remote Access Management
Management for EACMS, or SCI supporting PACS (Part for EACMS, PACS, and SCI.
OR
PACS, and SCI. (Requirement 3.1). (Requirement R3)
R3) The Responsible Entity did not
OR OR
have a method to determine
authenticated vendor-initiated
Page 14 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity did not remote connections for The Responsible Entity did not
have a method to terminate EACMS or SCI supporting have any methods as required
authenticated vendor-initiated EACMS (Part 3.1). by Parts 3.1 and 3.2
remote connections for PACS (Requirement R3).
OR
or SCI supporting PACS (Part
3.2). The Responsible Entity did not
have a method to terminate
authenticated vendor-initiated
remote connections or control
the ability to reconnect for
EACMS or SCI supporting
EACMS (Part 3.2).
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-005-8 Technical Rationale
Page 15 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and to
bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a responsible
entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated version number from -2 to -3
Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 12/30/10 Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Update
Asset identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with other
CIP standards and to
revise format to use
RBS Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-005-5.
6 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address
certain directives in
FERC Order No. 829.
6 10/18/2018 FERC Order approving CIP-005-6. Docket No.
RM17-13-000.
7 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address
directives in FERC
Order No. 850.
7 03/18/2021 FERC Order approving CIP-005-7. Docket No.
RD21-2-000
8 5/9/2024 Approved by the NERC Board of Virtualization
Modifications by
Trustees.
Project 2016-02
Page 16 of 16
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-005-8.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-005-7.pdf ---
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
2. Number: CIP-005-7
3. Purpose: To manage electronic access to BES Cyber Systems by specifying a
controlled Electronic Security Perimeter in support of protecting BES Cyber Systems
against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
Page 1 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-005-7:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters.
Page 2 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03.
6. Background: Standard CIP-005 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to
cyber security, which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber
Systems and require a minimum level of organizational, operational and procedural
controls to mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements. An
entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes,
but it must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident
response plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an approach
involving multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans, and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the
standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training
program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be
referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any
additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
Page 3 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented processes.
These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk
Electric System. A review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability
standards for UFLS program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of
300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of
systems to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this
concept from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk
Management Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately
based on impact and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used
in the “Applicability Systems” column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization processes.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial-up Connectivity – Only applies to high
impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial-up Connectivity.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity – Only
applies to high impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity.
This also excludes Cyber Assets in the BES Cyber System that cannot be directly
accessed through External Routable Connectivity.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized
as medium impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
Page 4 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at Control Centers – Only applies to
medium impact BES Cyber Systems located at a Control Center.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial-up Connectivity – Only applies to
medium impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial-up Connectivity.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity – Only
applies to medium impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable
Connectivity. This also excludes Cyber Assets in the BES Cyber System that
cannot be directly accessed through External Routable Connectivity.
• Protected Cyber Assets (PCA) – Applies to each Protected Cyber Asset
associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact
BES Cyber System.
• Electronic Access Points (EAP) – Applies at Electronic Access Points associated
with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber
System.
• Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access
Control System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or
medium impact BES Cyber System.
• Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced
high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples
may include, but are not limited to, firewalls, authentication servers, and log
monitoring and alerting systems.
Page 5 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-005-7 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-005-7 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-7 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their All applicable Cyber Assets connected to a An example of evidence may include, but
associated: network via a routable protocol shall reside is not limited to, a list of all ESPs with all
• PCA within a defined ESP. uniquely identifiable applicable Cyber
Assets connected via a routable protocol
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
within each ESP.
their associated:
• PCA
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems with All External Routable Connectivity must be An example of evidence may include, but
External Routable Connectivity and their through an identified Electronic Access is not limited to, network diagrams
associated: Point (EAP). showing all external routable
• PCA communication paths and the identified
EAPs.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
• PCA
1.3 Electronic Access Points for High Impact Require inbound and outbound access An example of evidence may include, but
BES Cyber Systems permissions, including the reason for is not limited to, a list of rules (firewall,
Electronic Access Points for Medium granting access, and deny all other access access control lists, etc.) that
Impact BES Cyber Systems by default. demonstrate that only permitted access
is allowed and that each access rule has a
documented reason.
Page 6 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-7 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial- Where technically feasible, perform An example of evidence may include, but
up Connectivity and their associated: authentication when establishing Dial-up is not limited to, a documented process
• PCA Connectivity with applicable Cyber Assets. that describes how the Responsible Entity
is providing authenticated access through
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
each dial-up connection.
Dial-up Connectivity and their associated:
• PCA
1.5 Electronic Access Points for High Impact Have one or more methods for detecting An example of evidence may include, but
BES Cyber Systems known or suspected malicious is not limited to, documentation that
Electronic Access Points for Medium communications for both inbound and malicious communications detection
Impact BES Cyber Systems at Control outbound communications. methods (e.g. intrusion detection system,
Centers application layer firewall, etc.) are
implemented.
Page 7 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts, where technically feasible, in CIP-005-7 Table R2 –Remote Access Management. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M2. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively address each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
005-7 Table R2 –Remote Access Management and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the
Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-7 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their For all Interactive Remote Access, utilize Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: an Intermediate System such that the are not limited to, network diagrams or
• PCA Cyber Asset initiating Interactive Remote architecture documents.
Access does not directly access an
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
applicable Cyber Asset.
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
• PCA
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their For all Interactive Remote Access An example of evidence may include, but
associated: sessions, utilize encryption that is not limited to, architecture documents
• PCA terminates at an Intermediate System. detailing where encryption initiates and
terminates.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
• PCA
Page 8 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-7 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Require multi-factor authentication for all An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Interactive Remote Access sessions. is not limited to, architecture documents
• PCA detailing the authentication factors used.
Examples of authenticators may include,
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
but are not limited to,
External Routable Connectivity and their
• Something the individual knows such
associated:
as passwords or PINs. This does not
• PCA
include User ID;
• Something the individual has such as
tokens, digital certificates, or smart
cards; or
• Something the individual is such as
fingerprints, iris scans, or other
biometric characteristics.
Page 9 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-7 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Have one or more methods for Examples of evidence may include, but
determining active vendor remote access are not limited to, documentation of the
their associated:
sessions (including Interactive Remote methods used to determine active
• PCA
Access and system-to-system remote vendor remote access (including
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
access). Interactive Remote Access and system-
with External Routable Connectivity
to-system remote access), such as:
and their associated:
• Methods for accessing logged or
• PCA
monitoring information to determine
active vendor remote access sessions;
• Methods for monitoring activity (e.g.
connection tables or rule hit counters
in a firewall, or user activity
monitoring) or open ports (e.g.
netstat or related commands to
display currently active ports) to
determine active system to system
remote access sessions; or
• Methods that control vendor
initiation of remote access such as
vendors calling and requesting a
second factor in order to initiate
remote access.
Page 10 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-7 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Have one or more method(s) to disable Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: active vendor remote access (including are not limited to, documentation of the
• PCA Interactive Remote Access and system- methods(s) used to disable active vendor
to-system remote access). remote access (including Interactive
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
Remote Access and system-to-system
External Routable Connectivity and their
remote access), such as:
associated:
• Methods to disable vendor
• PCA
remote access at the applicable
Electronic Access Point for system-
to-system remote access; or
• Methods to disable vendor
Interactive Remote Access at the
applicable Intermediate System.
Page 11 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-005-7 Table R3 –Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS and PACS. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M3. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively address each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
005-7 Table R3 – Vendor Remote Access Management and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-7 Table R3 – Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS and PACS
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 EACMS and PACS associated with High Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include, but
Impact BES Cyber Systems determine authenticated vendor- are not limited to, documentation of the
EACMS and PACS associated with initiated remote connections. methods used to determine
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with authenticated vendor-initiated remote
External Routable Connectivity connections, such as:
• Methods for accessing logged or
monitoring information to
determine authenticated vendor-
initiated remote connections.
3.2 EACMS and PACS associated with High Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include, but
Impact BES Cyber Systems terminate authenticated vendor-initiated are not limited to, documentation of the
EACMS and PACS associated with remote connections and control the methods(s) used to terminate
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with ability to reconnect. authenticated vendor-initiated remote
External Routable Connectivity connections to applicable
systems. Examples include terminating
an active vendor-initiated
shell/process/session or dropping an
active vendor-initiated connection in a
firewall. Methods to control the ability to
reconnect, if necessary, could
be: disabling an Active Directory account;
disabling a security token; restricting IP
addresses from vendor sources in a
firewall; or physically disconnecting a
network cable to prevent a reconnection.
Page 12 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated
by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of
monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable
Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to
provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-time period
since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 13 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
have a method for detecting document one or more
malicious communications for processes for CIP-005-6 Table
both inbound and outbound R1 – Electronic Security
communications. (1.5) Perimeter. (R1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
have all applicable Cyber
Assets connected to a network
via a routable protocol within
a defined Electronic Security
Perimeter (ESP). (1.1)
OR
External Routable Connectivity
through the ESP was not
through an identified EAP.
(1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
require inbound and outbound
access permissions and deny
all other access by default.
(1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
perform authentication when
establishing dial-up
connectivity with the
Page 14 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
applicable Cyber Assets, where
technically feasible. (1.4)
R2. The Responsible Entity does The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not have documented implement processes for one implement processes for two implement processes for three
processes for one or more of of the applicable items for of the applicable items for of the applicable items for
the applicable items for Requirement Parts 2.1 through Requirement Parts 2.1 through Requirement Parts 2.1 through
Requirement Parts 2.1 through 2.3. 2.3; 2.3;
2.3.
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did
not have either: one or more not have one or more
method(s) for determining method(s) for determining
active vendor remote access active vendor remote access
sessions (including Interactive sessions (including
Remote Access and system-to- Interactive Remote Access
system remote access) (2.4); and system-to-system
or one or more methods to remote access) (2.4) and one
disable active vendor remote or more methods to disable
access (including Interactive active vendor remote access
Remote Access and system-to- (including Interactive Remote
system remote access) Access and system-to-system
(2.5). remote access) (2.5).
R3. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity had The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
document one or more method(s) as required by Part implement processes for implement any processes for
processes for CIP-005-7 Table 3.1 for EACMS but did not either Part 3.1 or Part 3.2. (R3) CIP-005-7 Table R3 – Vendor
R3 – Vendor Remote Access have a method to determine Remote Access Management
OR
Management for EACMS and authenticated vendor-initiated for EACMS and PACS. (R3)
The Responsible Entity had
PACS. (R3) remote connections for PACS
OR
method(s) as required by Part
(3.1).
3.1 for PACS but did not have a
OR
method to determine
Page 15 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity had authenticated vendor-initiated The Responsible Entity did not
method(s) as required by Part remote connections for have any methods as required
3.2 for EACMS but did not EACMS (3.1). by Parts 3.1 and 3.2 (R3).
have a method to terminate
OR
authenticated vendor-initiated
The Responsible Entity had
remote connections for PACS
method(s) as required by Part
(3.2).
3.2 for PACS but did not have a
method to terminate
authenticated vendor-initiated
remote connections or control
the ability to reconnect for
EACMS (3.2).
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03
• CIP-005-7 Technical Rationale
Page 16 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Version History
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and to
bring the compliance elements into conformance
with the latest guidelines for developing
compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a responsible
entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated version number from -2 to -3 Approved
by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 12/30/10 Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Asset Update
identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP
standards and to
revise format to
use RBS Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-005-5.
6 07/20/17 Modified to address certain directives in FERC Revised
Order No. 829.
6 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
6 10/18/2018 FERC Order approving CIP-005-6. Docket No.
RM17-13-000.
7 08/01/2019 Modified to address directives in FERC Order No. Revised
850.
7 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
7 3/18/2021 FERC Order approving CIP-005-7. Docket No. RD21-
2-000
Page 17 of 17
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-005-7.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-003-10.pdf ---
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
2. Number: CIP-003-10
3. Purpose: To specify consistent and sustainable security management controls that
establish responsibility and accountability to protect BES Cyber Systems
(BCS) against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in
the Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
Page 1 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-003-10:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between Cyber Systems providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or
more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan.”
Page 3 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager approval at least
once every 15 calendar months for one or more documented cyber security policies
that collectively address the following topics: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. For its high impact and medium impact BCS, if any:
1.1.1. Personnel and training (CIP-004);
1.1.2. Electronic Security Perimeters (CIP-005) including Interactive Remote
Access;
1.1.3. Physical security of BCS (CIP-006);
1.1.4. System security management (CIP-007);
1.1.5. Incident reporting and response planning (CIP-008);
1.1.6. Recovery plans for BCS (CIP-009);
1.1.7. Configuration change management and vulnerability assessments (CIP-
010);
1.1.8. Information protection (CIP-011); and
1.1.9. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
1.2. For its assets identified in CIP-002 containing low impact BCS, if any:
1.2.1. Cyber security awareness;
1.2.2. Physical security controls;
1.2.3. Electronic access controls;
1.2.4. Cyber Security Incident response;
1.2.5. Transient Cyber Assets (TCA) and Removable Media malicious code risk
mitigation;
1.2.6. Vendor electronic remote access security controls; and
1.2.7. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
M1. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, policy documents; revision
history, records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management
system that indicate review of each cyber security policy at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager for each cyber
security policy.
R2. Each Responsible Entity with at least one asset identified in CIP-002 containing low
impact BCS shall implement one or more documented cyber security plan(s) for its low
impact BCS, and Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI) that supports a low impact BCS, that
Page 4 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
include the sections in Attachment 1. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon:
Operations Planning]
Note: An inventory, list, or discrete identification of low impact BCS or their BES Cyber
Assets (BCA) is not required. Lists of authorized users are not required.
M2. Evidence shall include each of the documented cyber security plan(s) that collectively
include each of the sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation of the cyber security plan(s). Additional examples of evidence per
section are located in Attachment 2.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall identify a CIP Senior Manager by name and document
any change within 30 calendar days of the change. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated and approved
document from a high level official designating the name of the individual identified
as the CIP Senior Manager.
R4. The Responsible Entity shall implement a documented process to delegate authority,
unless no delegations are used. Where allowed by the CIP Standards, the CIP Senior
Manager may delegate authority for specific actions to a delegate or delegates. These
delegations shall be documented, including the name or title of the delegate, the
specific actions delegated, and the date of the delegation; approved by the CIP Senior
Manager; and updated within 30 days of any change to the delegation. Delegation
changes do not need to be reinstated with a change to the delegator. [Violation Risk
Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M4. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated document,
approved by the CIP Senior Manager, listing individuals (by name or title) who are
delegated the authority to approve or authorize specifically identified items.
Page 5 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure,
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity in
their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance with mandatory and
enforceable Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention periods identify the period of
time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance.
For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than
the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence
to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of
time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the
time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
Page 6 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-10)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not address one of the nine address two of the nine topics address three of the nine address four or more of the
topics required by required by Requirement R1. topics required by nine topics required by
Requirement R1. (Part 1.1) (Part 1.1) Requirement R1. (Part 1.1) Requirement R1. (Part 1.1)
OR OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not complete its review of complete its review of the one complete its review of the one have any documented cyber
the one or more or more documented cyber or more documented cyber security policies for its high
documented cyber security security policies for its high security policies for its high impact and medium impact
policies for its high impact impact and medium impact impact and medium impact BCS as required by
and medium impact BCS as BCS as required by BCS as required by Requirement R1. (Part 1.1)
required by Requirement R1 Requirement R1 within 16 Requirement R1 within 17
OR
within 15 calendar months calendar months but did calendar months but did
but did complete this complete this review in less complete this review in less The Responsible Entity did not
review in less than or equal than or equal to 17 calendar than or equal to 18 calendar complete its review of the one
to 16 calendar months of months of the previous months of the previous or more documented cyber
the previous review. (Part review. (Part 1.1) review. (Part 1.1) security policies as required by
1.1) Requirement R1 within 18
OR OR
calendar months of the
OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not previous review.
The Responsible Entity did complete its approval of the complete its approval of the (Requirement R1)
not complete its approval of one or more documented one or more documented
OR
the one or more cyber security policies for its cyber security policies for its
documented cyber security high impact and medium high impact and medium The Responsible Entity did not
policies for its high impact impact BCS as required by impact BCS as required by complete its approval of the
and medium impact BCS as Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP one or more documented
required by Requirement R1 Senior Manager within 16 Senior Manager within 17 cyber security policies for its
by the CIP Senior Manager calendar months but did calendar months but did high impact and medium
Page 7 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-10)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
within 15 calendar months complete this approval in less complete this approval in less impact BCS as required by
but did complete this than or equal to 17 calendar than or equal to 18 calendar Requirement R1 by the CIP
approval in less than or months of the previous months of the previous Senior Manager within 18
equal to 16 calendar approval. (Part 1.1) approval. (Requirement R1) calendar months of the
months of the previous previous approval. (Part 1.1)
OR OR
approval. (Part 1.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
OR
documented one or more documented one or more The Responsible Entity did not
The Responsible Entity cyber security policies for its cyber security policies for its address four or more of the
documented one or more assets identified in CIP-002 assets identified in CIP-002 seven topics required by
cyber security policies for its containing low impact BCS, containing low impact BCS, Requirement R1. (Part 1.2)
assets identified in CIP-002 but did not address two of the but did not address three of
OR
containing low impact BCS, seven topics required by the seven topics required by
but did not address one of Requirement R1. (Part 1.2) Requirement R1. (Part 1.2) The Responsible Entity did not
the seven topics required by have any documented cyber
OR OR
Requirement R1. (Part 1.2) security policies for its assets
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not identified in CIP-002
OR
complete its review of the one complete its review of the one containing low impact BCS as
The Responsible Entity did or more documented cyber or more documented cyber required by Requirement R1.
not complete its review of security policies for its assets security policies for its assets (R1.2)
the one or more identified in CIP-002 identified in CIP-002
OR
documented cyber security containing low impact BCS as containing low impact BCS as
policies for its assets required by Requirement R1 required by Requirement R1 The Responsible Entity did not
identified in CIP-002 within 16 calendar months but within 17 calendar months but complete its approval of the
containing low impact BCS did complete this review in did complete this review in one or more documented
as required by Requirement less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18 cyber security policies for its
R1 within 15 calendar calendar months of the calendar months of the assets identified in CIP-002
months but did complete previous review. (Part 1.2) previous review. (Part 1.2) containing low impact BCS as
this review in less than or required by Requirement R1
OR OR
equal to 16 calendar by the CIP Senior Manager
Page 8 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-10)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
months of the previous The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not within 18 calendar months of
review. (Part 1.2) complete its approval of the complete its approval of the the previous approval. (R1.2)
one or more documented one or more documented
OR
cyber security policies for its cyber security policies for its
The Responsible Entity did assets identified in CIP-002 assets identified in CIP-002
not complete its approval of containing low impact BCS as containing low impact BCS as
the one or more required by Requirement R1 required by Requirement R1
documented cyber security by the CIP Senior Manager by the CIP Senior Manager
policies for its assets within 16 calendar months but within 17 calendar months but
identified in CIP-002 did complete this approval in did complete this approval in
containing low impact BCS less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18
as required by Requirement calendar months of the calendar months of the
R1 by the CIP Senior previous approval. (Part 1.2) previous approval. (Part 1.2)
Manager within 15 calendar
months but did complete
this approval in less than or
equal to 16 calendar
months of the previous
approval. (Part 1.2)
R2 The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity failed The Responsible Entity failed The Responsible Entity failed
failed to document cyber to reinforce cyber security to implement the physical to document and implement
security awareness practices at least once every security controls according to one or more cyber security
according to Requirement 15 calendar months according Requirement R2, Attachment plan(s) according to
R2, Attachment 1, Section 1. to Requirement R2, 1, Section 2. (Requirement R2) Requirement R2, Attachment
(Requirement R2) Attachment 1, Section 1. 1. (Requirement R2)
OR
(Requirement R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity failed
OR
The Responsible Entity to permit only necessary
failed to document its cyber The Responsible Entity failed inbound and outbound
security plan(s) for to document physical security electronic access controls
Page 9 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-10)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
electronic access controls controls according to according to Requirement R2,
according to Requirement Requirement R2, Attachment Attachment 1, Section 3.1.
R2, Attachment 1, Section 3. 1, Section 2. (Requirement R2) (Requirement R2)
(Requirement R2)
OR OR
OR
The Responsible Entity failed The Responsible Entity
The Responsible Entity to document electronic access documented failed to test
failed to document one or controls according to each Cyber Security Incident
more Cyber Security Requirement R2, Attachment response plan(s) at least once
Incident response plan(s) 1, Section 3. (Requirement R2) every 36 calendar months
according to Requirement according to Requirement R2,
OR
R2, Attachment 1, Section 4. Attachment 1, Section 4.
(Requirement R2) The Responsible Entity failed (Requirement R2)
to implement authentication
OR OR
for all Dial-up Connectivity
The Responsible Entity according to Requirement R2, The Responsible Entity failed
failed to update each Cyber Attachment 1, Section 3.2 to notify the Electricity
Security Incident response (Requirement R2) Information Sharing and
plan(s) within 180 days Analysis Center (E-ISAC)
OR
according to Requirement according to Requirement R2,
R2, Attachment 1, Section 4. The Responsible Entity failed Attachment 1, Section 4.
(Requirement R2) to include the process for (Requirement R2)
identification, classification,
OR OR
and response to Cyber
The Responsible Entity Security Incidents according to The Responsible Entity failed
failed to manage its Requirement R2, Attachment to implement mitigation for
Transient Cyber Asset(s) 1, Section 4. (Requirement R2) the introduction of malicious
according to Requirement code for Transient Cyber
OR
R2, Attachment 1, Section Assets managed by the
5.1. (Requirement R2) The Responsible Entity failed Responsible Entity according
to document the to Requirement R2,
Page 10 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-10)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
OR determination of whether an Attachment 1, Section 5.1.
identified Cyber Security (Requirement R2)
The Responsible Entity
Incident is a Reportable Cyber
failed to document the OR
Security Incident and
Removable Media section(s)
subsequent notification to the The Responsible Entity failed
according to Requirement
Electricity Information Sharing to implement mitigation for
R2, Attachment 1, Section
and Analysis Center (E-ISAC) the introduction of malicious
5.3. (Requirement R2)
according to Requirement R2, code for Transient Cyber
OR Attachment 1, Section 4. Assets managed by a party
(Requirement R2) other than the Responsible
The Responsible Entity
Entity according to
implemented vendor OR
Requirement R2, Attachment
electronic remote access
The Responsible Entity failed 1, Section 5.2. (Requirement
security controls but failed
to document mitigation for R2)
to document its cyber
the introduction of malicious
security process for vendor OR
code for Transient Cyber
electronic remote access
Assets managed by the The Responsible Entity failed
security controls according
Responsible Entity according to implement mitigation for
to Requirement R2,
to Requirement R2, the threat of detected
Attachment 1, Section 6.
Attachment 1, Sections 5.1 malicious code on the
(Requirement R2)
and 5.3. (Requirement R2) Removable Media prior to
connecting Removable Media
OR
according to Requirement R2,
The Responsible Entity failed Attachment 1, Section 5.3.
to document mitigation for (Requirement R2)
the introduction of malicious
OR
code for Transient Cyber
Assets managed by a party The Responsible Entity failed
other than the Responsible to document and implement
Entity according to its cyber security process for
Requirement R2, Attachment vendor electronic remote
Page 11 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-10)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
1, Section 5.2. (Requirement access security controls
R2) according to Requirement R2,
Attachment 1, Section 6.
OR
(Requirement R2)
The Responsible Entity failed
to implement the Removable
Media section(s) according to
Requirement R2, Attachment
1, Section 5.3. (Requirement
R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
documented its cyber security
process for vendor electronic
remote access security
controls, but failed to
implement vendor electronic
remote access security
controls according to
Requirement R2. Attachment
1, Section 6. (Requirement R2)
R3 The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not document changes to document changes to the CIP document changes to the CIP identify, by name, a CIP Senior
the CIP Senior Manager Senior Manager within 40 Senior Manager within 50 Manager.
within 30 calendar days but calendar days but did calendar days but did
OR
did document this change in document this change in less document this change in less
less than 40 calendar days than 50 calendar days of the than 60 calendar days of the The Responsible Entity did not
change. (Requirement R3) change. (Requirement R3) document changes to the CIP
Senior Manager within 60
Page 12 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-10)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
of the change. calendar days of the change.
(Requirement R3) (Requirement R3)
R4 The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity does
not document changes to document changes to the document changes to the not have a process to delegate
the delegate within 30 delegate within 40 calendar delegate within 50 calendar actions from the CIP Senior
calendar days but did days but did document this days but did document this Manager. (Requirement R4)
document this change in change in less than 50 change in less than 60
OR
less than 40 calendar days calendar days of the change. calendar days of the change.
of the change. (Requirement R4) (Requirement R4) The Responsible Entity did not
(Requirement R4) document changes to the
delegate within 60 calendar
days of the change.
(Requirement R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-003-10 Technical Rationale
Page 13 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to 3/24/06
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements
and to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business
judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or
system from service in order to perform
testing, in response to FERC order issued
September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to coordinate with
other CIP standards and to
revise format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two FERC
directives from Order No.
791 related to identify,
assess, and correct language
and communication
networks.
Page 14 of 22
CIP-003-10 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version Date Action Change Tracking
6 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the version
adopted by the Board on
11/13/2014. Revised version
addresses remaining
directives from Order No.
791 related to transient
devices and low impact BES
Cyber Systems.
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
7 2/9/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revised to address FERC
Order No. 822 directives
regarding (1) the definition
of LERC and (2) transient
devices.
7 4/19/18 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-7.
Docket No. RM17-11-000
8 5/9/19 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Removed SPS references.
Revised to address FERC
Order No. 843 regarding
mitigating the risk of
malicious code.
8 7/31/2019 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-8.
Docket No. RD19-5-000.
9 11/16/2022 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revisions to address NERC
Board Resolution and the
Supply Chain Report
9 3/16/2023 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-9.
Docket No. RD23-3-000.
10 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Virtualization Modifications
under Project 2016-02
Page 15 of 22
Attachment 1
Attachment 1
Required Sections for Cyber Security Plan(s)
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in the cyber security
plan(s) required under Requirement R2.
Responsible Entities with multiple-impact BCS ratings can utilize policies, procedures, and
processes for their high or medium impact BCS to fulfill the sections for the development of low
impact cyber security plan(s). Each Responsible Entity can develop a cyber security plan(s)
either by individual asset or groups of assets.
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: Each Responsible Entity shall reinforce, at least once
every 15 calendar months, cyber security practices (which may include associated
physical security practices).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Each Responsible Entity shall control physical access,
based on need as determined by the Responsible Entity, to (1) the asset or the
locations of the low impact BCS within the asset, and (2) the Cyber Asset(s) or VCA,
as specified by the Responsible Entity, that provide electronic access control(s)
implemented for Section 3.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: For each asset containing low impact BES Cyber
System(s) identified pursuant to CIP-002, the Responsible Entity shall implement
electronic access controls to:
3.1 Permit only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access as
determined by the Responsible Entity for any communications that are:
i. Between:
• a low impact BCS; or
• An SCI that supports a low impact BCS
and a Cyber System(s) outside the asset containing:
• the low impact BCS(s); or
• the SCI that supports a low impact BCS;
ii. using a routable protocol when entering or leaving the asset containing
the low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS; and
iii. not used for time-sensitive communications of Protection Systems.
3.2 Authenticate all Dial-up Connectivity, if any, that provides access to low
impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS, per system capability.
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more
Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), either by asset or group of assets, which
shall include:
4.1 Identification, classification, and response to Cyber Security Incidents;
Page 16 of 22
Attachment 1
4.2 Determination of whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and subsequent notification to the
Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC), unless
prohibited by law;
4.3 Identification of the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security Incident
response by groups or individuals;
4.4 Incident handling for Cyber Security Incidents;
4.5 Testing the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) at least once every 36
calendar months by: (1) responding to an actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; (2) using a drill or tabletop exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; or (3) using an operational exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; and
4.6 Updating the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), if needed, within 180
calendar days after completion of a Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
test or actual Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
Section 5. TCA and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation: Each Responsible Entity
shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or more plan(s)
to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of the introduction of malicious code
to low impact BCS, through the use of TCA or Removable Media. The plan(s) shall
include:
5.1 For TCA managed by the Responsible Entity, if any, the use of one or a
combination of the following in an ongoing or on-demand manner (per TCA
capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
5.2 For TCA managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity, if any:
5.2.1 Use one or a combination of the following prior to connecting (per
TCA capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
• Review of other method(s) to mitigate the risk of introduction
of malicious code.
Page 17 of 22
Attachment 1
5.2.2 For any method used pursuant to 5.2.1, Responsible Entities shall
determine whether any additional mitigation actions are necessary
and implement such actions prior to connecting the TCA.
5.3 For Removable Media, the use of each of the following:
5.3.1 Method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media using a
Cyber Asset or VCA other than a BCS or SCI that supports a low impact
BCS; and
5.3.2 Mitigation of the threat of detected malicious code on the Removable
Media prior to connecting Removable Media to a low impact BCS or
SCI that supports a low impact BCS.
Section 6. Vendor Electronic Remote Access Security Controls: For assets containing low impact
BES Cyber System(s) identified pursuant to CIP-002, that allow vendor electronic
remote access, the Responsible Entity shall implement a process to mitigate risks
associated with vendor electronic remote access, where such access has been
established under Section 3.1. These processes shall include:
6.1 One or more method(s) for determining vendor electronic remote access;
6.2 One or more method(s) for disabling vendor electronic remote access; and
6.3 One or more method(s) for detecting known or suspected inbound and
outbound malicious communications for vendor electronic remote access.
Page 18 of 22
Attachment 2
Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Cyber Security Plan(s)
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: An example of evidence for Section 1 may include, but is
not limited to, documentation that the reinforcement of cyber security practices
occurred at least once every 15 calendar months. The evidence could be
documentation through one or more of the following methods:
• Direct communications (for example, e-mails, memos, or computer-based
training);
• Indirect communications (for example, posters, intranet, or brochures); or
• Management support and reinforcement (for example, presentations or
meetings).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 2 may include, but are
not limited to:
• Documentation of the selected access control(s) (e.g., card key, locks, perimeter
controls), monitoring controls (e.g., alarm systems, human observation), or other
operational, procedural, or technical physical security controls that control
physical access to both:
a. The asset, if any, or the locations of the low impact BCS within the asset; and
b. The Cyber System(s) specified by the Responsible Entity that provide(s)
electronic access controls implemented for Attachment 1, Section 3.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 3 may include, but are
not limited to:
1. Documentation showing that at each asset or group of assets, the routable
protocol communication as outlined in Section 3 is restricted by electronic access
controls to permit only inbound and outbound electronic access that the
Responsible Entity deems necessary, except where an entity provides rationale
that communications are used for time-sensitive communications of Protection
Systems. Examples of such documentation may include, but are not limited to
representative diagrams that illustrate control of inbound and outbound
communication(s) or lists of implemented electronic access controls (e.g., access
control lists restricting IP addresses, ports, or services; implementing
unidirectional gateways).
2. Documentation of authentication for Dial-up Connectivity (e.g., dial out only to a
preprogrammed number to deliver data, dial-back modems, modems that must
be remotely controlled by the control center or control room, or access control
on the BCS).
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: An example of evidence for Section 4 may include,
but is not limited to, dated documentation, such as policies, procedures, or process
Page 19 of 22
Attachment 2
documents of one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) developed
either by asset or group of assets that include the following processes:
1. to identify, classify, and respond to Cyber Security Incidents; to determine
whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident and for notifying the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(E-ISAC);
2. to identify and document the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security
Incident response by groups or individuals (e.g., initiating, documenting,
monitoring, reporting, etc.);
3. for incident handling of a Cyber Security Incident (e.g., containment, eradication,
or recovery/incident resolution);
4. for testing the plan(s) along with the dated documentation that a test has been
completed at least once every 36 calendar months; and
5. to update, as needed, Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) within 180
calendar days after completion of a test or actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident.
Section 5. TCA and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation:
1. Examples of evidence for Section 5.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern
updates, application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication,
or other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a TCA does
not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the introduction of
malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the vendor or
Responsible Entity that identifies that the TCA does not have the capability.
2. Examples of evidence for Section 5.2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or
procedures that document a review of the installed antivirus update level;
memoranda, electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from
the party other than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update
process, the use of application whitelisting, use of system hardening performed
by the party other than the Responsible Entity; evidence from change
management systems, electronic mail or contracts that identifies the
Responsible Entity’s acceptance that the practices of the party other than the
Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other method(s) to
mitigate malicious code for TCA managed by a party other than the Responsible
Entity. If a TCA does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the
introduction of malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the
Responsible Entity or the party other than the Responsible Entity that identifies
that the TCA does not have the capability.
Page 20 of 22
Attachment 2
Examples of evidence for Attachment 1, Section 5.2.2 may include, but are not
limited to, documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or
contracts that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigation is
necessary and has been implemented prior to connecting the TCA managed by a
party other than the Responsible Entity.
3. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to detect malicious code such as
results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on-demand
scanning. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.2 may include, but are not limited
to, documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating the threat of
detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the method(s)
used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and the
mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or documented
confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed to be free of
malicious code
Section 6. Vendor Electronic Remote Access Security Controls: Examples of evidence
showing the implementation of the process for Section 6 may include, but
are not limited to:
1. For Section 6.1, documentation showing:
• steps to preauthorize access;
• alerts generated by vendor log on;
• session monitoring;
• security information management logging alerts;
• time-of-need session initiation;
• session recording;
• system logs; or
• other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
2. For Section 6.2, documentation showing:
• disabling vendor electronic remote access user or system accounts;
• disabling inbound and/or outbound hardware or software
ports, services, or access permissions on applications, firewall,
IDS/IPS, router, switch, VPN, Remote Desktop, remote control,
or other hardware or software used for providing vendor
electronic remote access;
• disabling communications protocols (such as IP) used for
systems which establish and/or maintain vendor electronic
remote access;
Page 21 of 22
Attachment 2
• Removing physical layer connectivity (e.g., disconnect an Ethernet
cable, power down equipment);
• administrative control documentation listing the methods, steps, or
systems used to disable vendor electronic remote access; or
• other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
3. For Section 6.3, documentation showing implementation of processes or
technologies which have the ability to detect malicious communications
such as:
• Anti-malware technologies;
• Intrusion Detection System (IDS)/Intrusion Prevention System (IPS);
• Automated or manual log reviews;
• alerting; or
• other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
Page 22 of 22
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-003-10.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-002-7.pdf ---
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
2. Number: CIP-002-7
3. Purpose: To identify and categorize BES Cyber Systems (BCS) and their associated
BES Cyber Assets (BCA) for the application of cyber security requirements
commensurate with the adverse impact that loss, compromise, or misuse of those BCS
could have on the reliable operation of the Bulk Electric System (BES). Identification
and categorization of BCS support appropriate protection against compromises that
could lead to misoperation or instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein,
the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
Page 1 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-002-7:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends
to one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan”
Page 3 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement a process that considers each of the
following assets for purposes of Parts 1.1 through 1.3: [Violation Risk Factor:
High][Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
i. Control Centers and backup Control Centers;
ii. Transmission stations and substations;
iii. Generation resources;
iv. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart
Resources and Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements;
v. RAS that support the reliable operation of the BES; and
vi. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability
section 4.2.1 above.
1.1. Identify each of the high impact BCS according to Attachment 1, Section 1, if
any, at each asset;
1.2. Identify each of the medium impact BCS according to Attachment 1, Section 2,
if any, at each asset; and
1.3. Identify each asset that contains a low impact BCS according to Attachment 1,
Section 3, if any (a discrete list of low impact BCS is not required).
M1. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, dated electronic or physical lists
required by Requirement R1.
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall: [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations
Planning]
2.1 Review the identifications in Requirement R1 and its parts (and update them if
there are changes identified) at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it
has no identified items in Requirement R1, and
2.2 Have its CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications required
by Requirement R1 at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it has no
identified items in Requirement R1.
M2. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, electronic or physical dated
records to demonstrate that the Responsible Entity has reviewed and updated, where
necessary, the identifications required in Requirement R1 and its parts, and has had its
CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications required in Requirement
R1 and its parts at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it has none identified
in Requirement R1 and its parts, as required by Requirement R2.
Page 4 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any
entity as otherwise designated by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their
respective roles of monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and
enforceable Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show
that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and
Enforcement Program” refers to the identification of the processes that will be
used to evaluate data or information for the purpose of assessing performance
or outcomes with the associated Reliability Standard.
Page 5 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
Violation Severity Levels
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-7)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1
For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with
more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES
assets in Requirement R1, five assets in Requirement R1, more assets in Requirement R1, more assets in Requirement R1, more
percent or fewer BES assets than five percent but less than than 10 percent but less than than 15 percent of BES assets
have not been considered or equal to 10 percent of BES or equal to 15 percent of BES have not been considered,
according to Requirement R1; assets have not been assets have not been according to Requirement R1;
considered, according to considered, according to
OR OR
Requirement R1; Requirement R1;
For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a
OR OR
total of 40 or fewer BES assets, total of 40 or fewer BES assets,
2 or fewer BES assets in For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a more than six BES assets in
Requirement R1, have not been total of 40 or fewer BES assets, total of 40 or fewer BES assets, Requirement R1, have not been
considered according to more than two, but fewer than more than four, but fewer than considered according to
Requirement R1; or equal to four BES assets in or equal to six BES assets in Requirement R1;
Requirement R1, have not been Requirement R1, have not been
OR OR
considered according to considered according to
For Responsible Entities with Requirement R1; Requirement R1; For Responsible Entities with
more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high
OR OR
and medium impact BCS, five and medium impact BCS, more
percent or fewer of identified For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with than 15 percent of identified
BCS have not been categorized more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high BCS have not been categorized
or have been incorrectly and medium impact BCS, more or medium impact BCS, more or have been incorrectly
categorized at a lower than five percent but less than than 10 percent but less than categorized at a lower
category; or equal to 10 percent of or equal to 15 percent of category;
identified BCS have not been identified BCS have not been
OR OR
categorized or have been categorized or have been
For Responsible Entities with a incorrectly categorized at a incorrectly categorized at a For Responsible Entities with a
total of 100 or fewer high and lower category; lower category; total of 100 or fewer high and
medium impact BCS, five or medium impact BCS, more
Page 6 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-7)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
fewer identified BCS have not OR OR than 15 identified BCS have not
been categorized or have been been categorized or have been
For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a
incorrectly categorized at a incorrectly categorized at a
total of 100 or fewer high and total of 100 or fewer high or
lower category. lower category.
medium impact BCS, more than medium impact BCS, more than
OR five but less than or equal to 10 10 but less than or equal to 15 OR
identified BES Cyber Systems identified BCS have not been
For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with
have not been categorized or categorized or have been
more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high
have been incorrectly incorrectly categorized at a
and medium impact BCS, five and medium impact BCS, more
categorized at a lower lower category.
percent or fewer high or than 15 percent of high or
category.
medium BCS have not been OR medium impact BCS have not
identified; OR been identified;
For Responsible Entities with
OR For Responsible Entities with more than a total of 100 high OR
more than a total of 100 high and medium impact BCS, more
For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a
and medium impact BCS, more than 10 percent but less than
total of 100 or fewer high and total of 100 or fewer high and
than five percent but less than or equal to 15 percent high or
medium impact BCS, five or medium impact BES Cyber
or equal to 10 percent high or medium BCS have not been
fewer high or medium BCS Systems, more than 15 high or
medium BCS have not been identified;
have not been identified. medium impact BCS have not
identified;
OR been identified.
OR
For Responsible Entities with a
For Responsible Entities with a total of 100 or fewer high and
total of 100 or fewer high and medium impact BCS, more than
medium impact BCS, more than 10 but less than or equal to 15
five but less than or equal to 10 high or medium BCS have not
high or medium BCS have not been identified.
been identified.
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
complete its review and update complete its review and update complete its review and update complete its review and update
Page 7 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-7)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
for the identification required for the identification required for the identification required for the identification required
for Requirement R1 within 15 for Requirement R1 within 16 for Requirement R1 within 17 for Requirement R1 within 18
calendar months but less than calendar months but less than calendar months but less than calendar months of the
or equal to 16 calendar months or equal to 17 calendar months or equal to 18 calendar months previous review. (Part 2.1)
of the previous review. (Part of the previous review. of the previous review. (Part
OR
2.1) (Part2.1) 2.1)
The Responsible Entity failed to
OR OR OR
complete its approval of the
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity failed to The Responsible Entity failed to identifications required by
complete its approval of the complete its approval of the complete its approval of the Requirement R1 by the CIP
identifications required by identifications required by identifications required by Senior Manager or delegate
Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP according to Requirement R2
Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate within 18 calendar months of
according to Requirement R2 according to Requirement R2 according to Requirement R2 the previous approval. (Part
within 15 calendar months but within 16 calendar months but within 17 calendar months but 2.2)
less than or equal to 16 less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18
calendar months of the calendar months of the calendar months of the
previous approval. (Part 2.2) previous approval. (Part 2.2) previous approval. (Part 2.2)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-002-7 Technical Rationale
Page 8 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control center.” 3/24/06
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and to bring
the compliance elements into conformance with the
latest guidelines for developing compliance elements
of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a Responsible Entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated version number from -2 to -3. Update
Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 12/30/10 Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Asset Update
identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP standards
and to revise
format to use RBS
Template.
5.1 9/30/13 Replaced “Devices” with “Systems” in a definition in Errata
background section.
5.1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-002-5.1.
5.1a 11/02/16 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5.1a 12/14/201 FERC letter Order approving CIP-002-5.1a. Docket No.
6 RD17-2-000.
6 5/14/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified Criterion
2.12.
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Virtualization
Modifications
Page 9 of 12
Attachment 1
Attachment 1 – Impact Rating Criteria
Impact Rating Criteria
The criteria defined in Attachment 1 do not constitute stand-alone compliance requirements,
but are criteria characterizing the level of impact and are referenced by requirements.
1. High impact rating
Each BCS used by and located at any of the following:
1.1. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Reliability Coordinator.
1.2. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Balancing Authority: 1) for generation equal to or greater than an
aggregate of 3000 MW in a single Interconnection, or 2) for one or more of the assets
that meet criterion 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
1.3. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Transmission Operator for one or more of the assets that meet
criterion 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, or 2.10.
1.4 Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Generator Operator for one or more of the assets that meet
criterion 2.1, 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
2. Medium impact rating
Each BCS, not included in Section 1 above, associated with any of the following:
2.1. Commissioned generation, by each group of generating units at a single plant location,
with an aggregate highest rated net Real Power capability of the preceding 12
calendar months equal to or exceeding 1500 MW in a single Interconnection. For each
group of generating units, the only BCS that meet this criterion are each discrete
shared BCS that could, within 15 minutes, adversely impact the reliable operation of
any combination of units that in aggregate equal or exceed 1500 MW in a single
Interconnection.
2.2. Each BES reactive resource or group of resources at a single location (excluding
generation Facilities) with an aggregate maximum Reactive Power nameplate rating of
1000 MVAR or greater (excluding those at generation Facilities). The only BCS that
meet this criterion are each discrete shared BCS that could, within 15 minutes,
adversely impact the reliable operation of any combination of resources that in
aggregate equal or exceed 1000 MVAR.
2.3. Each generation Facility that its Planning Coordinator or Transmission Planner
designates, and informs the Generator Owner or Generator Operator, as necessary to
avoid an Adverse Reliability Impact in the planning horizon of more than one year.
2.4. Transmission Facilities operated at 500 kV or higher. For the purpose of this criterion,
the collector bus for a generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is
part of the generation interconnection Facility.
2.5. Transmission Facilities that are operating between 200 kV and 499 kV at a single
station or substation, where the station or substation is connected at 200 kV or higher
Page 10 of 12
Attachment 1
voltages to three or more other Transmission stations or substations and has an
"aggregate weighted value" exceeding 3000 according to the table below. The
"aggregate weighted value" for a single station or substation is determined by
summing the "weight value per line" shown in the table below for each incoming and
each outgoing BES Transmission Line that is connected to another Transmission
station or substation. For the purpose of this criterion, the collector bus for a
generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is part of the generation
interconnection Facility.
Voltage Value of a Line Weight Value per Line
less than 200 kV (not applicable) (not applicable)
200 kV to 299 kV 700
300 kV to 499 kV 1300
500 kV and above 0
2.6. Generation at a single plant location or Transmission Facilities at a single station or
substation location that are identified by its Reliability Coordinator, Planning
Coordinator, or Transmission Planner as critical to the derivation of Interconnection
Reliability Operating Limits (IROLs) and their associated contingencies.
2.7. Transmission Facilities identified as essential to meeting Nuclear Plant Interface
Requirements.
2.8. Transmission Facilities, including generation interconnection Facilities, providing the
generation interconnection required to connect generator output to the Transmission
Systems that, if destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable,
would result in the loss of the generation Facilities identified by any Generator Owner
as a result of its application of Attachment 1, criterion 2.1 or 2.3.
2.9. Each RAS or automated switching System that operates BES Elements, that, if
destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable, would cause one or
more Interconnection Reliability Operating Limits (IROLs) violations for failure to
operate as designed or cause a reduction in one or more IROLs if destroyed, degraded,
misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable.
2.10. Each system or group of Elements that performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system, without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more
implementing undervoltage load shedding (UVLS) or underfrequency load shedding
(UFLS) under a load shedding program that is subject to one or more requirements in
a NERC or regional reliability standard.
2.11. Each Control Center or backup Control Center, not already included in high impact
rating above, used to perform the functional obligations of the Generator Operator for
an aggregate highest rated net Real Power capability of the preceding 12 calendar
months equal to or exceeding 1500 MW in a single Interconnection.
2.12. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Transmission Operator not included in high impact rating, above.
Page 11 of 12
Attachment 1
2.13. Each Control Center or backup Control Center, not already included in high impact
rating above, used to perform the functional obligations of the Balancing Authority for
generation equal to or greater than an aggregate of 1500 MW in a single
Interconnection.
3. Low impact rating
BCS not included in Sections 1 or 2 above that are associated with any of the following
assets and that meet the applicability qualifications in Section 4 - Applicability, part 4.2 –
Facilities, of this standard:
3.1. Control Centers and backup Control Centers.
3.2. Transmission stations and substations.
3.3. Generation resources.
3.4. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart Resources and
Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements.
3.5. RAS that support the reliable operation of the Bulk Electric System.
3.6. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability section 4.2.1
above.
Page 12 of 12
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-002-7.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-007-7.pdf ---
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — System Security Management
2. Number: CIP-007-7
3. Purpose: To manage system security by specifying select technical, operational,
and procedural requirements in support of protecting BES Cyber Systems (BCS) against
compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric System
(BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
Page 1 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in
this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset
of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-007-7:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to
one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002- identification and categorization
processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to define
the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Dates: See Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan.
Page 3 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-7 Table R1 – System Hardening. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon:
Same Day Operations.]
M1. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
007-7 Table R1 – System Hardening and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures
column of the table.
CIP-007-7 Table R1– System Hardening
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Disable or prevent unneeded routable Examples of evidence may include, but are
protocol network accessibility on each not limited to:
1. Electronic Access Control and
Applicable System, per system capability.
Monitoring Systems (EACMS); • Documentation of the need for all
enabled network accessible logical
2. Physical Access Control Systems
ports or network accessible logical
(PACS); and
services, individually or by group;
3. Protected Cyber Asset (PCA)
• Listings of the listening ports,
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
individually or by group, from either
associated:
configuration files or settings,
1. EACMS;
command output (such as netstat),
2. PACS; and or network scans of open ports;
• Configuration or settings of host-
3. PCA
based firewalls or other device level
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
mechanisms that disable or prevent
Part.
unneeded network accessible logical
ports or network accessible logical
services; or
• Identity or process based access
policy or workload configuration
demonstrating needed network
accessibility.
Page 4 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-7 Table R1– System Hardening
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Protect against the use of unnecessary Examples of evidence may include, but are
physical input/output ports used for not limited to, documentation showing
1. PCA; and
network connectivity, console commands, types of protection of physical
2. Nonprogrammable communication
or Removable Media. input/output ports, either logically through
components located inside both a
system configuration or physically using a
PSP and an ESP.
port lock or signage.
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and
their associated:
1. PCA; and
2. Nonprogrammable communication
components located inside both a
PSP and an ESP.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part.
1.3 SCI supporting either: Mitigate the risk of CPU or memory Examples of evidence may include, but are
vulnerabilities by preventing the sharing of not limited to, documentation of the
High impact BCS or their associated PCA.
CPU resources and memory resources, configuration or settings showing that the
Medium impact BCS or their associated
excluding storage resources, between CPU and memory cannot be shared, such
PCA.
VCAs that are, or are associated with, a as:
medium or high impact BCS, and VCAs that
• Virtualization affinity rules; or
are not, or are not associated with, a
• Hardware partitioning of physical
medium or high impact BCS.
Cyber Assets.
Page 5 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Patch Management. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-007-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Patch Management and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-007-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Patch Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated: A patch management process for Examples of evidence may include, but
tracking, evaluating, and installing cyber are not limited to, documentation of a
1. EACMS;
security patches. The tracking portion patch management process and
2. PACS; and
shall include the identification of a documentation or lists of sources that are
3. PCA
source or sources that the Responsible monitored.
Medium impact BCS and their Entity tracks for the release of cyber
associated: security patches for Applicable Systems
1. EACMS; that are updateable and for which a
patching source exists.
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
2.2 High impact BCS and their associated: At least once every 35 calendar days, Examples of evidence may include, but
evaluate cyber security patches for are not limited to, an evaluation
1. EACMS;
applicability that have been released conducted by, referenced by, or on
2. PACS; and
since the last evaluation from the source behalf of a Responsible Entity of cyber
3. PCA
or sources identified in Part 2.1. security patches released by the
Medium impact BCS and their documented sources at least once every
associated: 35 calendar days.
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
2.3 High impact BES Cyber Systems and their For applicable patches identified in Part Examples of evidence may include, but
Page 6 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Patch Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
associated: 2.2, within 35 calendar days of the are not limited to:
evaluation completion, take one of the
1. EACMS; • Records of the installation of the
following actions:
cyber security patch (e.g., exports
2. PACS; and
• Apply the applicable patches; from automated patch
3. PCA
• Create a dated mitigation plan; or management tools that provide
Medium impact BES Cyber Systems and
• Revise an existing mitigation plan. installation date, verification of
their associated:
component software revision, or
Mitigation plans shall include the
1. EACMS; registry exports that show software
Responsible Entity’s planned actions to
2. PACS; and has been installed); or
mitigate the vulnerabilities addressed by
3. PCA each cyber security patch and a • A dated plan showing when and
timeframe to complete these how the vulnerability will be
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
mitigations. addressed, to include
this Part.
documentation of the actions to be
taken by the Responsible Entity to
mitigate the vulnerabilities
addressed by the cyber security
patch and a timeframe for the
completion of these mitigations.
2.4 High impact BCS and their associated: For each mitigation plan created or Examples of evidence may include, but
revised in Part 2.3, implement the plan are not limited to, records of
1. EACMS;
within the timeframe specified in the implementation of mitigations, and any
2. PACS; and
plan, unless a revision to the plan or an approval records for mitigation plan
3. PCA
extension to the timeframe specified in revisions or extensions.
Medium impact BCS and their
Part 2.3 is approved by the CIP Senior
associated:
Manager or delegate.
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
Page 7 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-7 Table R3 – Malicious Code Prevention. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Same Day Operations].
M3. Evidence must include each of the documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable requirement
parts in CIP-007-7 Table R3 – Malicious Code Prevention and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-007-7 Table R3 – Malicious Code Prevention
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Deploy method(s) to deter, detect, or Examples of evidence may include, but
prevent malicious code. are not limited to, records of the
1. EACMS;
Responsible Entity’s performance of these
2. PACS; and
processes (e.g., through traditional
3. PCA
antivirus, system hardening, policies,
Medium impact BCS and their etc.).
associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
3.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Mitigate the threat of detected malicious Examples of evidence may include, but
code. are not limited to:
1. EACMS;
• Records of response processes for
2. PACS; and
malicious code detection
3. PCA
• Records of the performance of
Medium impact BCS and their
these processes when malicious
associated:
code is detected.
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
3.3 High impact BCS and their associated: For those methods identified in Part 3.1 Examples of evidence may include, but
Page 8 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-7 Table R3 – Malicious Code Prevention
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1. EACMS; that use signatures or patterns, have a are not limited to, documentation
process for the update of the signatures or showing the process used for the update
2. PACS; and
patterns. The process must address testing of signatures or patterns.
3. PCA
and installing the signatures or patterns.
Medium impact BCS and their
associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
Page 9 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R4. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-7 Table R4 – Security Event Monitoring. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Same Day Operations and Operations Assessment.]
M4. Evidence must include each of the documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable requirement
parts in CIP-007-7 Table R4 – Security Event Monitoring and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-007-7 Table R4 – Security Event Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Log security events, per system capability, Examples of evidence may include, but
for identification of, and after-the-fact are not limited to, a paper or system
1. EACMS;
investigations of, Cyber Security Incidents generated listing of event types for which
2. PACS; and
that include, at a minimum, each of the the Applicable System is capable of
3. PCA
following types of events: detecting and, for generated events, is
Medium impact BCS and their associated: configured to log. This listing must include
4.1.1. Detected successful login
1. EACMS; attempts; the required types of events.
2. PACS; and 4.1.2. Detected failed access attempts
3. PCA and failed login attempts; and
SCI supporting an Applicable System in 4.1.3. Detected malicious code.
this Part.
4.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Generate alerts for security events that Examples of evidence may include, but
the Responsible Entity determines are not limited to, paper or system-
1. EACMS;
necessitates an alert that includes, as a generated listing of security events that
2. PACS; and
minimum, each of the following types of the Responsible Entity determined
3. PCA
events, per system capability: necessitate alerts, including paper or
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their system generated list showing how alerts
4.2.1. Detected malicious code from
associated: are configured.
Part 4.1; and
1. EACMS;
4.2.2. Detected failure of Part 4.1 event
2. PACS; and logging.
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
Page 10 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-7 Table R4 – Security Event Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Retain applicable security event logs Examples of evidence may include, but
identified in Part 4.1 for at least the last are not limited to, documentation of the
1. EACMS;
90 consecutive calendar days, per system event log retention process and paper or
2. PACS; and
capability, except under CIP Exceptional system generated reports showing log
3. PCA
Circumstances. retention configuration set at 90 calendar
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers days or greater.
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
4.4 High impact BCS and their associated: Review a summarization or sampling of Examples of evidence may include, but
logged security events as determined by are not limited to, documentation
1. EACMS; and
the Responsible Entity at intervals no describing the review, findings from the
2. PCA
greater than 15 calendar days to identify review (if any), and dated documentation
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
undetected Cyber Security Incidents. showing the review occurred.
this Part.
Page 11 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R5. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-7 Table R5 – System Access Controls. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning].
M5. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-007-7 Table 5 – System Access Controls and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation
as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-007-7 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Have a method(s) to enforce authentication An example of evidence may include, but
of interactive user access, per system is not limited to, documentation
1. EACMS;
capability. describing how access is authenticated.
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
Page 12 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-7 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Identify and inventory all known enabled Examples of evidence may include, but
default or other generic account types, are not limited to, a listing of accounts by
1. EACMS;
either by system, by groups of systems, by account types showing the enabled
2. PACS; and
location, or by system type(s). default or generic account types in use.
3. PCA
Medium impact BCS and their
associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
5.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Identify individuals who have authorized Examples of evidence may include, but
access to shared accounts. are not limited to, listing of shared
1. EACMS;
accounts and the individuals who have
2. PACS; and
authorized access to each shared account.
3. PCA
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
Page 13 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-7 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.4 High impact BCS and their associated: Change known default passwords, per Examples of evidence may include, but
system capability are not limited to:
1. EACMS;
• Records of a procedure that
2. PACS; and
passwords are changed when new
3. PCA
devices are in production; or
Medium impact BCS and their
• Documentation in system manuals or
associated:
other vendor documents showing
1. EACMS;
default vendor passwords were
2. PACS; and generated pseudo-randomly and are
thereby unique to the device.
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
5.5 High impact BCS and their associated: For password-only authentication for Examples of evidence may include, but
interactive user access, either technically or are not limited to:
1. EACMS;
procedurally enforce the following password
• System-generated reports or
2. PACS; and
parameters:
screenshots of the system-enforced
3. PCA
5.5.1. Password length that is, at least, the password parameters, including
Medium impact BCS and their
lesser of eight characters or the length and complexity; or
associated:
maximum length supported by the
• Attestations that include a reference
1. EACMS; Applicable Systems; and
to the documented procedures that
2. PACS; and 5.5.2. Minimum password complexity that were followed.
is the lesser of three or more
3. PCA
different types of characters (e.g.,
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
uppercase alphabetic, lowercase
this Part.
alphabetic, numeric, non-
alphanumeric) or the maximum
complexity supported by the
Applicable System.
Page 14 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-7 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.6 High impact BCS and their associated: For password-only authentication for Examples of evidence may include, but
interactive user access, either technically or are not limited to:
1. EACMS;
procedurally enforce password changes or
• System-generated reports or
2. PACS; and
an obligation to change the password at
screenshots of the system-enforced
3. PCA
least once every 15 calendar months, per
periodicity of changing passwords; or
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their system capability.
• Attestations that include a reference
associated:
to the documented procedures that
1. EACMS;
were followed.
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
5.7 High impact BCS and their associated: Limit the number of unsuccessful Examples of evidence may include, but
authentication attempts or generate alerts are not limited to:
1. EACMS;
after a threshold of unsuccessful
• Documentation of the account-
2. PACS; and
authentication attempts, per system
lockout parameters; or
3. PCA
capability.
• Rules in the alerting configuration or
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers
settings showing how the system
and their associated:
notified individuals after a
1. EACMS;
determined number of unsuccessful
2. PACS; and login attempts.
3. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part.
Page 15 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring
and enforcing compliance with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show
that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer
period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and
Enforcement Program” refers to the identification of the processes that will be
used to evaluate data or information for the purpose of assessing performance or
outcomes with the associated Reliability Standard.
1.4. Additional Compliance Information:
None
Page 16 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity had no The Responsible Entity had one The Responsible Entity neither
document one or more methods to protect against or more unneeded logical implemented nor documented
process(es) that included the unnecessary physical network accessible ports or one or more process(es) that
applicable items in CIP-007-7 input/output ports used for network accessible services included the applicable items in
Table R1. (Requirement R1) network connectivity, console enabled. (Part 1.1) CIP-007-6 Table R1.
commands, or Removable OR (Requirement R1)
Media. (Part 1.2)
The Responsible Entity has not
prevented the sharing of the
CPU and memory resources
between VCAs that are, or are
associated with, a Medium or
High Impact BCS, and VCAs that
are not, or are not associated
with a Medium or High Impact
BCS. (Part 1.3)
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
evaluate the cyber security include any processes, include any processes for implement or document one or
patches for applicability within including the identification of installing cyber security patches more process(es) that included
35 calendar days but less than sources, for tracking or for Applicable Systems. (Part the applicable items in CIP-007-
50 calendar days of the last evaluating cyber security 2.1) 7 Table R2. (Requirement R2)
evaluation for the source or patches for Applicable Systems.
OR OR
sources identified. (Part 2.2) (Part 2.1)
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
OR OR evaluate the cyber security include any processes for
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not patches for applicability within tracking, evaluating, or
apply the applicable cyber evaluate the cyber security 65 calendar days of the last installing cyber security patches
security patches, create a patches for applicability within evaluation for the source or for applicable Cyber Assets.
dated mitigation plan, or revise 50 calendar days but less than sources identified. (Part 2.2) (Part 2.1)
an existing mitigation plan 65 calendar days of the last
OR OR
within 35 calendar days but less evaluation for the source or
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
than 50 calendar days of the sources identified. (Part 2.2)
apply the applicable cyber obtain approval by the CIP
evaluation completion. (Part OR
security patches, create a Senior Manager or delegate.
2.3)
dated mitigation plan, or revise (Part 2.4)
Page 17 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity did not an existing mitigation plan OR
apply the applicable cyber within 65 calendar days of the
The Responsible Entity did not
security patches, create a evaluation completion. (Part
implement the plan as created
dated mitigation plan, or revise 2.3) or revised within the timeframe
an existing mitigation plan specified in the plan. (Part 2.4)
within 50 calendar days but less
than 65 calendar days of the
evaluation completion. (Part
2.3)
R3 N/A The Responsible Entity, where The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
signatures or patterns are used, mitigate the threat of detected implement or document one or
the Responsible Entity did not malicious code. (Part 3.2) more process(es) that included
address testing the signatures the applicable items in CIP-007-
OR
or patterns. (Part 3.3) 6 Table R3. (Requirement R3).
The Responsible Entity, where
signatures or patterns are used, OR
the Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
update malicious code deploy method(s) to deter,
protections. (Part 3.3). detect, or prevent malicious
code. (Part 3.1)
R4 The Responsible Entity missed The Responsible Entity missed The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
one of 15 calendar day interval one 15 calendar day interval generate alerts for all of the implement or document one or
and completed the review and completed the review required types of security more process(es) that included
within 22 calendar days of the within 30 calendar days of the events described in 4.2.1 the applicable items in CIP-007-
prior review. (Part 4.4) prior review. (Part 4.4) through 4.2.2. (Part 4.2) 6 Table R4. (Requirement R4)
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity, per
retain applicable security event system capability, did not
logs for at least the last 90 detect and log all of the
consecutive days. (Part 4.3) required types of events
described in 4.1.1 through
OR
4.1.3. (Part 4.1)
The Responsible Entity missed
two or more 15 calendar day
intervals. (Part 4.4)
Page 18 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R5 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
technically or procedurally technically or procedurally include the identification or implement or document one or
enforce password changes or enforce password changes or inventory of all known enabled more process(es) that included
an obligation to change the an obligation to change the default or other generic the applicable items in CIP-007-
password within 15 calendar password within 16 calendar account types, either by 6 Table R5. (Requirement R5)
months but less than or equal months but less than or equal system, by groups of systems,
OR
to 16 calendar months of the to 17 calendar months of the by location, or by system
The Responsible Entity does
last password change. (Part last password change. (Part type(s). (Part 5.2)
not have a method(s) to
5.6) 5.6) OR enforce authentication of
The Responsible Entity did not interactive user access. (Part
include the identification of the 5.1)
individuals with authorized
OR
access to shared accounts.
The Responsible Entity does
(Part 5.3)
not have a method(s) to
OR enforce authentication of
The Responsible Entity did not interactive user access. (Part
technically or procedurally 5.1)
enforce one of the two OR
password parameters as
The Responsible Entity did not,
described in 5.5.1 and 5.5.2.
per device capability, change
(Part 5.5)
known default passwords. (Part
OR 5.4)
The Responsible Entity OR
process(es) for password-only
The Responsible Entity did not
authentication for interactive
technically or procedurally
user access did not technically
enforce all of the password
or procedurally enforce one of
parameters described in 5.5.1
the two password parameters
and 5.5.2. (Part 5.5)
as described in 5.5.1 and 5.5.2.
OR
(Part 5.5)
The Responsible Entity did not
OR
technically or procedurally
The Responsible Entity did not
enforce password changes or
technically or procedurally
an obligation to change the
Page 19 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
enforce password changes or password within 18 calendar
an obligation to change the months of the last password
password within 17 calendar change. (Part 5.6)
months but less than or equal
OR
to 18 calendar months of the
The Responsible Entity neither
last password change. (Part
limited the number of
5.6)
unsuccessful authentication
attempts nor generated alerts
after a threshold of
unsuccessful authentication
attempts. (Part 5.7)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-007-7 Technical Rationale
Page 20 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
Version History
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control center.” 3/24/06
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and to bring the
compliance elements into conformance with the latest
guidelines for developing compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance Enforcement
Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence pertaining to
removing component or system from service in order to perform
testing, in response to FERC order issued September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP
standards and to
revise format to
use RBS Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-007-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two
FERC directives
from Order No.
791 related to
identify, assess,
and correct
language and
communication
networks.
6 2/15/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the
version adopted
by the Board on
11/13/2014.
Revised version
addresses
Page 21 of 22
CIP-007-7 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
remaining
directives from
Order No. 791
related to
transient devices
and low impact
BES Cyber
Systems.
6 1/21/16 FERC order issued approving CIP-007-6. Docket No. RM15-14-
000
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Virtualization
Modifications by
Project 2016-02
Page 22 of 22
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-007-7.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-004-8.pdf ---
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Personnel & Training
2. Number: CIP-004-8
3. Purpose: To minimize the risk against compromise that could lead to misoperation
or instability in the Bulk Electric System (BES) from individuals accessing BES Cyber
Systems (BCS) by requiring an appropriate level of personnel risk assessment,
training, security awareness, and access management in support of protecting BCS.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
Page 1 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All BES
Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-004-8:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends
to one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BCS
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the
CIP-002 identification and categorization processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to
define the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards
Implementation Plan.”
Page 3 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-8 Table R1 – Security Awareness Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-004-8 Table R1 – Security Awareness Program and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-004-8 Table R1 – Security Awareness Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS Security awareness that, at least once each An example of evidence may include, but is
calendar quarter, reinforces cyber security not limited to, documentation that the
Medium impact BCS
practices (which may include associated quarterly reinforcement has been
Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI) physical security practices) for the provided. Examples of evidence of
supporting an Applicable System in this Responsible Entity’s personnel who have reinforcement may include, but are not
Part. authorized electronic or authorized limited to, dated copies of information
unescorted physical access to Applicable used to reinforce security awareness, as
Systems. well as evidence of distribution, such as:
• direct communications (for
example, e-mails, memos,
computer-based training); or
• indirect communications (for
example, posters, intranet, or
brochures); or
• management support and
reinforcement (for example,
presentations or meetings).
Page 4 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more cyber security training program(s) appropriate to individual roles,
functions, or responsibilities that collectively includes each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-8 Table R2 –
Cyber Security Training Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M2. Evidence must include the training program that includes each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-8 Table R2
– Cyber Security Training Program and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation of the program(s).
CIP-004-8 Table R2 – Cyber Security Training Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Training content on: Examples of evidence may include, but are
not limited to, training material such as
1. Electronic Access Control or 2.1.1. Cyber security policies;
power point presentations, instructor notes,
Monitoring Systems (EACMS); and
2.1.2. Physical access controls; student notes, handouts, or other training
2. Physical Access Control Systems materials.
2.1.3. Electronic access controls;
(PACS)
2.1.4. The visitor control program;
Medium impact BCS with External
Routable Connectivity (ERC) and their 2.1.5. Handling of BES Cyber System
associated: Information (BCSI) and its storage;
1. EACMS; and 2.1.6. Identification of a Cyber Security
Incident and initial notifications in
2. PACS
accordance with the entity’s
Medium impact BCS with Interactive incident response plan;
Remote Access (IRA)
2.1.7. Recovery plans for BCS;
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
2.1.8. Response to Cyber Security
Part
Incidents; and
2.1.9. Cyber security risks associated
with a BCS electronic
interconnectivity and
interoperability with other Cyber
Systems, including Transient Cyber
Assets (TCA), and with Removable
Media.
2.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Require completion of the training Examples of evidence may include, but are
Page 5 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-8 Table R2 – Cyber Security Training Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
specified in Part 2.1 prior to granting not limited to, training records and
1. EACMS; and
authorized electronic access and documentation of when CIP Exceptional
2. PACS authorized unescorted physical access to Circumstances were invoked.
Applicable Systems, except during CIP
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
Exceptional Circumstances.
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Medium impact BCS with IRA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
2.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Require completion of the training Examples of evidence may include, but are
specified in Part 2.1 at least once every 15 not limited to, dated individual training
1. EACMS; and
calendar months. records.
2. PACS
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Medium impact BCS with IRA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
Page 6 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented personnel risk assessment program(s) to attain and
retain authorized electronic or authorized unescorted physical access to Applicable Systems that collectively include each
of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-8 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M3. Evidence must include the documented personnel risk assessment programs that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-8 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program and additional evidence to
demonstrate implementation of the program(s).
CIP-004-8 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Process to confirm identity. An example of evidence may include, but is
not limited to, documentation of the
1. EACMS; and
Responsible Entity’s process to confirm
2. PACS identity.
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Medium impact BCS with IRA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
3.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Process to perform a seven year criminal An example of evidence may include, but is
history records check as part of each not limited to, documentation of the
1. EACMS; and
personnel risk assessment that includes: Responsible Entity’s process to perform a
2. PACS seven year criminal history records check.
3.2.1. current residence, regardless of
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their duration; and
associated:
3.2.2. other locations where, during the
1. EACMS; and seven years immediately prior to the date
of the criminal history records check, the
2. PACS
subject has resided for six consecutive
Medium impact BCS with IRA
months or more.
Page 7 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-8 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
If it is not possible to perform a full seven
Part
year criminal history records check,
conduct as much of the seven year criminal
history records check as possible and
document the reason the full seven year
criminal history records check could not be
performed.
3.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Criteria or process to evaluate criminal An example of evidence may include, but is
history records checks for authorizing not limited to, documentation of the
1. EACMS; and
access. Responsible Entity’s criteria or process to
2. PACS evaluate criminal history records checks.
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Medium impact BCS with IRA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
3.4 High impact BCS and their associated: Criteria or process for verifying that Examples of evidence may include, but are
personnel risk assessments performed for not limited to, documentation of the
1. EACMS; and
contractors or service vendors are Responsible Entity’s criteria or process for
2. PACS conducted according to Parts 3.1 through verifying contractors or service vendors
3.3. personnel risk assessments.
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Medium impact BCS with IRA
Page 8 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-8 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
3.5 High impact BCS and their associated: Process to ensure that individuals with Examples of evidence may include, but are
authorized electronic or authorized not limited to, documentation of the
1. EACMS; and
unescorted physical access have had a Responsible Entity’s process for ensuring
2. PACS personnel risk assessment completed, that individuals with authorized electronic
except during CIP Exceptional or authorized unescorted physical access
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
Circumstances, according to Parts 3.1 have had a personnel risk assessment
associated:
through 3.4 within the last seven years. completed within the last seven years.
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Medium impact BCS with IRA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
Page 9 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R4. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented access management program(s) that collectively
include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-8 Table R4 – Access Management Program. [Violation Risk
Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M4. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in
CIP-004-8 Table R4 – Access Management Program and additional evidence to demonstrate that the access management
program was implemented as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-004-8 Table R4 – Access Management Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Process to authorize based on need, as Examples of evidence may include, but
determined by the Responsible Entity, are not limited to, dated documentation
1. EACMS; and
except for CIP Exceptional Circumstances: of the process to authorize electronic
2. PACS access, and unescorted physical access
4.1.1. Electronic access; and
in a PSP.
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
4.1.2. Unescorted physical access into a
associated:
Physical Security Perimeter (PSP)
1. EACMS; and
(except for medium impact BCS
without ERC).
2. PACS
Medium impact BCS with IRA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this Part
4.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Verify at least once each calendar quarter Examples of evidence may include, but
that individuals with active electronic are not limited to:
1. EACMS; and
access or unescorted physical access
• Dated documentation of the
2. PACS have authorization records.
verification between the system
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
generated list of individuals who
associated:
have been authorized for access
(i.e., workflow database) and a
1. EACMS; and
system generated list of personnel
2. PACS
who have access (i.e., user account
listing), or
Medium impact BCS with IRA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this Part
• Dated documentation of the
verification between a list of
Page 10 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-8 Table R4 – Access Management Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
individuals who have been
authorized for access (i.e.,
authorization forms) and a list of
individuals provisioned for access
(i.e., provisioning forms or shared
account listing).
4.3 High impact BCS and their associated: For electronic access, verify at least once Examples of evidence may include, but
every 15 calendar months that all user are not limited to, documentation of the
1. EACMS; and
accounts, user account groups, or user review that includes all of the following:
2. PACS role categories, and their specific,
1. A dated listing of all
associated privileges are correct and are
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their accounts/account groups or
those that the Responsible Entity
associated: roles within the system;
determines are necessary.
1. EACMS; and 2. A summary description of
privileges associated with each
2. PACS
group or role;
Medium impact BCS with IRA
3. Accounts assigned to the group
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this Part
or role; and
4. Dated evidence showing
verification of the privileges for
the group are authorized and
appropriate to the work
function performed by people
assigned to each account.
Page 11 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R5. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented access revocation program(s) that collectively include
each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-8 Table R5 – Access Revocation. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Same Day Operations and Operations Planning].
M5. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented programs that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-004-8 Table R5 – Access Revocation and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-004-8 Table R5 – Access Revocation
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.1 High impact BCS and their associated: A process to initiate removal of an An example of evidence may include, but is
individual’s ability for unescorted physical not limited to, documentation of all of the
1. EACMS; and
access (except for medium impact BCS following:
2. PACS
without ERC) and Interactive Remote
1. Dated workflow or sign-off form
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their Access (IRA) upon a termination action,
verifying access removal associated
associated: and complete the removals within 24
with the termination action; and
hours of the termination action (Removal
1. EACMS; and
2. Logs or other demonstration
of the ability for access may be different
2. PACS showing such persons no longer
than deletion, disabling, revocation, or
have access.
Medium impact BCS with IRA
removal of all access rights).
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
5.2 High impact BCS and their associated: For reassignments or transfers, revoke the Examples of evidence may include, but are
individual’s authorized electronic access to not limited to, documentation of all of the
1. EACMS; and
individual accounts; and authorized following:
2. PACS
unescorted physical access (except for
1. Dated workflow or sign-off form
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their medium impact BCS without ERC) that the
showing a review of logical and
associated: Responsible Entity determines are not
physical access; and
necessary by the end of the next calendar
1. EACMS; and
2. Logs or other demonstration
day following the date that the Responsible
2. PACS showing such persons no longer
Entity determines that the individual no
have access that the Responsible
Medium impact BCS with IRA
longer requires retention of that access.
Entity determines is not necessary.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
5.3 High impact BCS and their associated For termination actions, revoke the Examples of evidence may include, but are
Page 12 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-8 Table R5 – Access Revocation
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
EACMS individual’s non-shared user accounts not limited to, workflow or sign-off form
(unless already revoked according to Part showing access removal for any individual
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
5.1) within 30 calendar days of the BES Cyber Assets and software applications
Part
effective date of the termination action. as determined necessary to completing the
revocation of access and dated within
thirty calendar days of the termination
actions.
5.4 High impact BCS and their associated For termination actions, change passwords Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS for shared account(s) known to the user not limited to:
within 30 calendar days of the termination
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this • Workflow or sign-off form showing
action. For reassignments or transfers,
Part. password reset within 30 calendar
change passwords for shared account(s)
days of the termination action;
known to the user within 30 calendar days
• Workflow or sign-off form showing
following the date that the Responsible
password reset within 30 calendar
Entity determines that the individual no
days of the reassignments or
longer requires retention of that access.
transfers; or
If the Responsible Entity determines and
• Documentation of the extenuating
documents that extenuating operating
operating circumstance and
circumstances require a longer time
workflow or sign-off form showing
period, change the password(s) within 10
password reset within 10 calendar
calendar days following the end of the
days following the end of the
operating circumstances.
operating circumstance.
Page 13 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R6. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented access management program(s) to authorize, verify, and
revoke provisioned access to BCSI pertaining to the Applicable Systems identified in CIP-004-8 Table R6 – Access
Management for BES Cyber System Information that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
004-8 Table R6 – Access Management for BES Cyber System Information. To be considered access to BCSI in the context of
this requirement, an individual has both the ability to obtain and use BCSI. Provisioned access is to be considered the result
of the specific actions taken to provide an individual(s) the means to access BCSI (e.g., may include physical keys or access
cards, user accounts and associated rights and privileges, encryption keys). [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon:
Same Day Operations and Operations Planning].
M6. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented programs that collectively include the applicable requirement
parts in CIP-004-8 Table R6 – Access Management for BES Cyber System Information and additional evidence to
demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-004-8 Table R6 – Access Management for BES Cyber System Information
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
6.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Prior to provisioning, authorize (unless Examples of evidence may include, but are
already authorized according to Part 4.1) not limited to, individual records or lists
1. EACMS; and
based on need, as determined by the that include who is authorized, the date of
2. PACS Responsible Entity, except for CIP the authorization, and the justification of
Exceptional Circumstances: business need for the provisioned access.
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
associated: 6.1.1. Provisioned electronic access to
electronic BCSI; and
1. EACMS; and
6.1.2. Provisioned physical access to
2. PACS
physical BCSI (except for BCSI at a
Medium impact BCS with IRA
medium impact BCS without ERC).
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
Page 14 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-8 Table R6 – Access Management for BES Cyber System Information
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
6.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Verify at least once every 15 calendar Examples of evidence may include, but are
months that all individuals with not limited to, the documentation of the
1. EACMS; and
provisioned access to BCSI: review that includes all of the following:
2. PACS
6.2.1. have an authorization record; and • List of authorized individuals;
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
6.2.2. still need the provisioned access to • List of individuals who have been
associated:
perform their current work provisioned access;
1. EACMS; and functions, as determined by the
• Verification that provisioned access
Responsible Entity.
2. PACS
is appropriate based on need; and
Medium impact BCS with IRA
• Documented reconciliation actions,
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this if any.
Part
6.3 High impact BCS and their associated: For termination actions, remove the Examples of dated evidence may include,
individual’s ability to use provisioned but are not limited to, access revocation
1. EACMS; and
access to BCSI (unless already revoked records associated with the terminations
2. PACS according to Part 5.1) (except for BCSI at a and dated within the next calendar day of
medium impact BCS without ERC) by the the termination action.
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
end of the next calendar day following the
associated:
effective date of the termination action.
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Medium impact BCS with IRA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
Page 15 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring
and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability
Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention periods identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide
other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the
last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation:
• The applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• The applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 16 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-8)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not
reinforce cyber security practices reinforce cyber security not reinforce cyber security document or implement any security
during a calendar quarter but did practices during a calendar practices during a calendar awareness process(es) to reinforce
so less than 10 calendar days quarter but did so between 10 quarter but did so within the cyber security practices. (Requirement
after the start of a subsequent and 30 calendar days after the subsequent quarter but R1)
calendar quarter. (Part 1.1) start of a subsequent calendar beyond 30 calendar days
OR
quarter. (Part 1.1) after the start of that
calendar quarter. (Part 1.1) The Responsible Entity did not
reinforce cyber security practices and
associated physical security practices
for at least two consecutive calendar
quarters. (Part 1.1)
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not
include one of the training include two of the training not include three of the implement a cyber security training
content topics in Requirement content topics in Requirement training content topics in program appropriate to individual
Parts 2.1.1 through 2.1.9. (Part Parts 2.1.1 through 2.1.9. (Part Requirement Parts 2.1.1 roles, functions, or responsibilities.
2.1) 2.1) through 2.1.9. (Part 2.1) (Requirement R2)
OR OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not include
train one individual (with the train two individuals (with the not train three individuals four or more of the training content
exception of CIP Exceptional exception of CIP Exceptional (with the exception of CIP topics in Requirement Parts 2.1.1
Circumstances) prior to their Circumstances) prior to their Exceptional Circumstances) through 2.1.9. (Part 2.1)
being granted authorized being granted authorized prior to their being granted
OR
electronic and authorized electronic and authorized authorized electronic and
unescorted physical access. (Part unescorted physical access. authorized unescorted The Responsible Entity did not train
2.2) (Part 2.2) physical access. (Part 2.2) four or more individuals (with the
exception of CIP Exceptional
OR OR OR
Circumstances) prior to their being
granted authorized electronic and
Page 17 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-8)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
authorized unescorted physical access.
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did
(Part 2.2)
train one individual with train two individuals with not train three individuals
authorized electronic or authorized electronic or with authorized electronic or OR
authorized unescorted physical authorized unescorted physical authorized unescorted
The Responsible Entity did not train
access within 15 calendar access within 15 calendar physical access within 15
four or more individuals with
months of the previous training months of the previous training calendar months of the
authorized electronic or authorized
completion date. (Part 2.3) completion date. (Part 2.3) previous training completion
unescorted physical access within 15
date. (Part 2.3)
calendar months of the previous
training completion date. (Part 2.3)
R3 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not have all
conduct the personnel risk conduct the personnel risk not conduct the personnel of the required elements as described
assessments as a condition of assessments as a condition of risk assessments as a by 3.1 through 3.4 included within
granting authorized electronic or granting authorized electronic condition of granting documented program(s) for
authorized unescorted physical or authorized unescorted authorized electronic or implementing personnel risk
access for one individual. physical access for two authorized unescorted assessments, for individuals, including
(Requirement R3) individuals. (Requirement R3) physical access for three contractors and service vendors, for
individuals. (Requirement R3) obtaining and retaining authorized
OR OR
cyber or authorized unescorted
OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not physical access. (Requirement R3)
confirm identity for one confirm identity for two The Responsible Entity did
OR
individual. (Parts 3.1 & 3.4) individuals. (Parts 3.1 & 3.4) not confirm identity for three
individuals. (Parts 3.1 & 3.4) The Responsible Entity did not
OR OR
conduct the personnel risk
OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not assessments as a condition of granting
include the required checks include the required checks The Responsible Entity did authorized electronic or authorized
described in 3.2.1 through 3.2.2 described in 3.2.1 through not include the required unescorted physical access for four or
for one individual. (Parts 3.2 & 3.2.2 for two individuals. (Parts checks described in 3.2.1 more individuals. (Requirement R3)
3.4) 3.2 & 3.4) through 3.2.2 for three
OR
individuals. (Parts 3.2 & 3.4)
OR OR
OR
Page 18 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-8)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not confirm
evaluate criminal history records evaluate criminal history not evaluate criminal history identity for four or more individuals.
check for access authorization records check for access records check for access (Parts 3.1 & 3.4)
for one individual. (Parts 3.3 & authorization for two authorization for three
OR
3.4) individuals. (Parts 3.3 & 3.4) individuals. (Parts 3.3
through 3.4) The Responsible Entity did not include
OR OR
the required checks described in 3.2.1
OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not through 3.2.2 for four or more
conduct personnel risk conduct personnel risk The Responsible Entity did individuals. (Parts 3.2 & 3.4)
assessments for one individual assessments for two individuals not conduct personnel risk
OR
with authorized electronic or with authorized electronic or assessments for three
authorized unescorted physical authorized unescorted physical individuals with authorized The Responsible Entity did not
access within 7 calendar years of access within 7 calendar years electronic or authorized evaluate criminal history records
the previous personnel risk of the previous personnel risk unescorted physical access check for access authorization for four
assessments completion date. assessments completion date. within 7 calendar years of the or more individuals. (Parts 3.3 through
(Part 3.5) (Part 3.5) previous personnel risk 3.4)
assessments completion
OR
date. (Part 3.5)
The Responsible Entity did not
conduct personnel risk assessments
for four or more individuals with
authorized electronic or authorized
unescorted physical access within 7
calendar years of the previous
personnel risk assessments
completion date. (Part 3.5)
R4 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not
verify that individuals with active authorize electronic access or not authorize electronic implement any documented
electronic or active unescorted unescorted physical access access or unescorted physical program(s) for access management.
physical access have based on need for one access based on need for two (Requirement R4)
authorization records during a individual. (Part 4.1) individuals. (Part 4.1)
OR
Page 19 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-8)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
calendar quarter but did so less OR OR
The Responsible Entity did not
than 10 calendar days after the
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did authorize electronic access or
start of a subsequent calendar
verify that individuals with not verify that individuals unescorted physical access based on
quarter. (Part 4.2)
active electronic or active with active electronic or need for three or more individuals.
OR unescorted physical access active unescorted physical (Part 4.1)
have authorization records access have authorization
The Responsible Entity did not OR
during a calendar quarter but records during a calendar
verify that user accounts, user
did so between 10 and 20 quarter but did so between The Responsible Entity did not verify
account groups, or user role
calendar days after the start of 20 and 30 calendar days after that individuals with active electronic
categories, and their specific,
a subsequent calendar quarter. the start of a subsequent or active unescorted physical access
associated privileges are correct
(Part 4.2) calendar quarter. (Part 4.2) have authorization records for at least
and necessary within 15 calendar
two consecutive calendar quarters.
months of the previous OR OR
(Part 4.2)
verification for 5% or less of its
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did
BCS or SCI, privileges were OR
verify that user accounts, user not verify that user accounts,
incorrect or unnecessary. (Part
account groups, or user role user account groups, or user The Responsible Entity did not verify
4.3)
categories, and their specific, role categories, and their that user accounts, user account
associated privileges are specific, associated privileges groups, or user role categories, and
correct and necessary within 15 are correct and necessary their specific, associated privileges are
calendar months of the within 15 calendar months of correct and necessary within 15
previous verification for more the previous verification for calendar months of the previous
than 5% but less than (or equal more than 10% but less than verification for more than 15% of its
to) 10% of its BCS or SCI, (or equal to) 15% of its BCS BCS or SCI, privileges were incorrect or
privileges were incorrect or or SCI, privileges were unnecessary. (Part 4.3)
unnecessary. (Part 4.3) incorrect or unnecessary.
(Part 4.3)
R5 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity has not
revoke individual’s user accounts initiate removal of the ability not initiate removal of the implemented any documented
upon termination action within for unescorted physical access ability for unescorted program(s) for access revocation for
30 calendar days of the date of and IRA upon a termination physical access and IRA upon
action or complete the removal a termination action or
Page 20 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-8)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
termination action for one or within 24 hours of the complete the removal within electronic access or unescorted
more individuals. (Part 5.3) termination action for one 24 hours of the termination physical access. (Requirement R5)
individual. (Part 5.1) action for two individuals.
OR OR
(Part 5.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not initiate
OR
change passwords for shared The Responsible Entity for one removal of the ability for unescorted
accounts known to the user upon individual, did not revoke the The Responsible Entity for physical access and Interactive
termination action, authorized electronic access to two individuals, did not Remote Access upon a termination
reassignment, or transfer within individual accounts and revoke the authorized action or complete the removal within
30 calendar days of the date of authorized unescorted physical electronic access to 24 hours of the termination action for
termination action, access by the end of the next individual accounts and three or more individuals. (Part 5.1)
reassignment, or transfer for one calendar day following the authorized unescorted
OR
or more individuals. (Part 5.4) predetermined date. (Part 5.2) physical access by the end of
the next calendar day The Responsible Entity for three or
OR
following the predetermined more individuals, did not revoke the
The Responsible Entity did not date. (Part 5.2) authorized electronic access to
change one or more passwords individual accounts and authorized
for shared accounts known to unescorted physical access by the end
the user within 10 calendar days of the next calendar day following the
following the end of the predetermined date. (Part 5.2)
extenuating operating
circumstances. (Part 5.4)
R6 The Responsible Entity, for one The Responsible Entity, for two The Responsible Entity, for The Responsible Entity did not
individual, did not authorize individuals, did not authorize three individuals, did not implement one or more documented
provisioned electronic access to provisioned electronic access authorize provisioned access management program(s) for
electronic BCSI or provisioned to electronic BCSI or electronic access to BCSI. (Requirement R6)
physical access to physical BCSI. provisioned physical access to electronic BCSI or
OR
(Part 6.1) physical BCSI. (Part 6.1) provisioned physical access
to physical BCSI. (Part 6.1) The Responsible Entity, for four or
OR OR
more individuals, did not authorize
OR
provisioned electronic access to
Page 21 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-8)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
electronic BCSI or provisioned physical
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did
access to physical BCSI. (Part 6.1)
perform the verification required perform the verification not perform the verification
by Part 6.2 within 15 calendar required by Part 6.2 within 16 required by Part 6.2 within OR
months but did in less than or calendar months but did in less 17 calendar months but less
The Responsible Entity did not
equal to 16 calendar months of than or equal to 17 calendar than or equal to 18 calendar
perform the verification required by
the previous verification. (Part months of the previous months of the previous
Part 6.2 more than 18 calendar
6.2) verification. (Part 6.2) verification. (Part 6.2)
months of the previous verification.
OR OR OR (Part 6.2)
The Responsible Entity, for
The Responsible Entity, for one The Responsible Entity, for two OR
three individuals, did not
individual, did not remove the individuals, did remove each
The Responsible Entity, for four or
remove each individual’s
individual’s ability to use individual’s ability to use
more individuals, did not remove each
ability to use provisioned
provisioned access to BCSI by the provisioned access to BCSI by
individual’s ability to use provisioned
timeframe required in Part 6.3. the timeframe required in Part access to BCSI by the
access to BCSI by the timeframe
6.3. timeframe required in Part
required in Part 6.3.
6.3.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-004-8 Technical Rationale
Page 22 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
“control center.”
Modifications to clarify the requirements
and to bring the compliance elements
into conformance with the latest
guidelines for developing compliance
elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business
2 9/30/09
judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
3 12/16/09 pertaining to removing component or
system from service in order to perform
testing, in response to FERC order issued
September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
Modified to coordinate with
other CIP standards and to
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
revise format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-004-5.
5.1 9/30/13 Modified two VSLs in R4 Errata
Addressed two FERC
6 11/13/14 directives from Order No.
Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
791 related to identify,
assess, and correct language
Page 23 of 24
CIP-004-8 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Version Date Action Change Tracking
and communication
networks.
Replaces the version adopted
by the Board on 11/13/2014.
Revised version addresses
6 2/12/15
Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. remaining directives from
Order No. 791 related to
transient devices and low
impact BES Cyber Systems.
FERC order issued approving CIP-004-6.
6 1/21/16
Docket No. RM15-14-000
Revised to enhance BES
7 8/12/21
Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees reliability for entities to
manage their BCSI.
Virtualization Modifications
8 5/9/2024
Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees
by Project 2016-02
Page 24 of 24
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-004-8.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-012-1.pdf ---
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
2. Number: CIP-012-1
3. Purpose: To protect the confidentiality and integrity of Real-time Assessment and
Real-time monitoring data transmitted between Control Centers.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: The requirements in this standard apply to the following
functional entities, referred to as “Responsible Entities,” that own or operate a
Control Center.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Generator Operator
4.1.3. Generator Owner
4.1.4. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.5. Transmission Operator
4.1.6. Transmission Owner
4.2. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Reliability Standard CIP-012-1:
4.2.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.2. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant
to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3. A Control Center that transmits to another Control Center Real-time
Assessment or Real-time monitoring data pertaining only to the
generation resource or Transmission station or substation co-located
with the transmitting Control Center.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for CIP-012-1.
Page 1 of 5
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. The Responsible Entity shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances,
one or more documented plan(s) to mitigate the risks posed by unauthorized
disclosure and unauthorized modification of Real-time Assessment and Real-time
monitoring data while being transmitted between any applicable Control Centers. The
Responsible Entity is not required to include oral communications in its plan. The plan
shall include: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. Identification of security protection used to mitigate the risks posed by
unauthorized disclosure and unauthorized modification of Real-time Assessment
and Real-time monitoring data while being transmitted between Control
Centers;
1.2. Identification of where the Responsible Entity applied security protection for
transmitting Real-time Assessment and Real-time monitoring data between
Control Centers; and
1.3. If the Control Centers are owned or operated by different Responsible Entities,
identification of the responsibilities of each Responsible Entity for applying
security protection to the transmission of Real-time Assessment and Real-time
monitoring data between those Control Centers.
M1. Evidence may include, but is not limited to, documented plan(s) that meet the
security objective of Requirement R1 and documentation demonstrating the
implementation of the plan(s).
Page 2 of 5
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC, the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring
and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability
Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide
other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-time period since the
last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• The Responsible Entities shall keep data or evidence of each Requirement in
this Reliability Standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 3 of 5
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity failed
R1.
documented its plan(s) but documented its plan(s) but to document plan(s) for
failed to include one of the failed to include two of the Requirement R1;
applicable Parts of the plan applicable Parts of the plan
Or
as specified in Requirement as specified in Requirement
R1. R1.
The Responsible Entity failed
to implement any Part of its
plan(s) for Requirement R1,
except under CIP Exceptional
Circumstances.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
Implementation Plan.
Technical Rationale for CIP-012-1.
Implementation Guidance.
Page 4 of 5
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
Version History
Version Date Action Change
Tracking
1 August 16, 2018 Adopted by NERC Board of Trustees Respond to FERC
Order No. 822
1 January 23, 2020 FERC Order issued approving CIP-012-1.
Docket No. RM18-20-000;
Page 5 of 5
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-012-1.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-008-6.pdf ---
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
2. Number: CIP-008-6
3. Purpose: To mitigate the risk to the reliable operation of the BES as the result of a
Cyber Security Incident by specifying incident response requirements.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein,
the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme where the Remedial Action
Scheme is subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or
Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme where the Remedial Action
Scheme is subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or
Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-008-6:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters.
Page 2 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
4.2.3.3 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
5. Effective Dates:
See Implementation Plan for CIP-008-6.
6. Background:
Standard CIP-008 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber security.
CIP-002 requires the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems. CIP-
003, CIP-004, CIP-005, CIP-006, CIP-007, CIP-008, CIP-009, CIP-010, and CIP-011
require a minimum level of organizational, operational, and procedural controls to
mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements.
An entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes,
but must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it is commonly understood. For example, documented processes describing a
response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident response plans and recovery
plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an approach involving multiple
procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans and procedures involving a particular subject matter. Examples in
the standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel
training program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could
also be referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply
any additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Page 3 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented processes.
These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk
Electric System. A review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability
standards for UFLS program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of
300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems
to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management
Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact
and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used in the
“Applicable Systems” column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
Page 4 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall document one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) that collectively include each
of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications. [Violation
Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M1. Evidence must include each of the documented plan(s) that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in
CIP-008-6 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications.
CIP-008-6 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes to identify, An example of evidence may include, but
associated: classify, and respond to Cyber Security is not limited to, dated documentation of
• EACMS Incidents. Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
that include the process(es) to identify,
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
classify, and respond to Cyber Security
their associated:
Incidents.
• EACMS
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes: Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: 1.2.1 That include criteria to evaluate are not limited to, dated documentation
• EACMS and define attempts to of Cyber Security Incident response
compromise; plan(s) that provide guidance or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
thresholds for determining which Cyber
their associated: 1.2.2 To determine if an identified
Security Incidents are also Reportable
Cyber Security Incident is:
• EACMS
Cyber Security Incidents or a Cyber
• A Reportable Cyber
Security Incident that is determined to be
Security Incident; or
an attempt to compromise a system
• An attempt to
identified in the “Applicable Systems”
compromise, as
column including justification for attempt
determined by applying
determination criteria and documented
the criteria from Part
processes for notification.
1.2.1, one or more
systems identified in the
“Applicable Systems”
column for this Part; and
1.2.3 To provide notification per
Requirement R4.
Page 5 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-6 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their The roles and responsibilities of Cyber An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Security Incident response groups or is not limited to, dated Cyber Security
• EACMS individuals. Incident response process(es) or
procedure(s) that define roles and
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
responsibilities (e.g., monitoring,
their associated:
reporting, initiating, documenting, etc.) of
• EACMS
Cyber Security Incident response groups
or individuals.
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Incident handling procedures for Cyber An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Security Incidents. is not limited to, dated Cyber Security
• EACMS Incident response process(es) or
procedure(s) that address incident
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
handling (e.g., containment, eradication,
their associated:
recovery/incident resolution).
• EACMS
Page 6 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement each of its documented Cyber Security Incident response plans to collectively
include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Implementation and Testing. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Real-Time Operations].
M2. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates implementation of each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing.
CIP-008-6 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Test each Cyber Security Incident Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: response plan(s) at least once every 15 are not limited to, dated evidence of a
calendar months: lessons-learned report that includes a
• EACMS
summary of the test or a compilation of
• By responding to an actual
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and notes, logs, and communication resulting
Reportable Cyber Security Incident;
their associated: from the test. Types of exercises may
• With a paper drill or tabletop
include discussion or operations based
• EACMS
exercise of a Reportable Cyber
exercises.
Security Incident; or
• With an operational exercise of a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Use the Cyber Security Incident response Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: plan(s) under Requirement R1 when are not limited to, incident reports, logs,
responding to a Reportable Cyber and notes that were kept during the
• EACMS
Security Incident, responding to a Cyber incident response process, and follow-up
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and Security Incident that attempted to documentation that describes deviations
their associated: compromise a system identified in the taken from the plan during the incident
“Applicable Systems” column for this response or exercise.
• EACMS
Part, or performing an exercise of a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
Document deviations from the plan(s)
taken during the response to the incident
or exercise.
Page 7 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-6 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Retain records related to Reportable An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Cyber Security Incidents and Cyber is not limited to, dated documentation,
Security Incidents that attempted to such as security logs, police reports,
• EACMS
compromise a system identified in the emails, response forms or checklists,
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and “Applicable Systems” column for this Part forensic analysis results, restoration
their associated: as per the Cyber Security Incident records, and post-incident review notes
response plan(s) under Requirement R1. related to Reportable Cyber Security
• EACMS
Incidents and a Cyber Security Incident
that is determined to be an attempt to
compromise a system identified in the
“Applicable Systems” column.
Page 8 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall maintain each of its Cyber Security Incident response plans according to each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Review, Update, and
Communication. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Assessment].
M3. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates maintenance of each Cyber
Security Incident response plan according to the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R3 – Cyber Security
Incident Response Plan Review, Update, and Communication.
CIP-008-6 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Review, Update, and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their No later than 90 calendar days after An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: completion of a Cyber Security Incident not limited to, all of the following:
response plan(s) test or actual Reportable
• EACMS 1. Dated documentation of post
Cyber Security Incident response:
incident(s) review meeting notes or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
3.1.1. Document any lessons learned or follow-up report showing lessons
their associated:
document the absence of any learned associated with the Cyber
• EACMS lessons learned; Security Incident response plan(s)
test or actual Reportable Cyber
3.1.2. Update the Cyber Security
Security Incident response or dated
Incident response plan based on
documentation stating there were no
any documented lessons learned
lessons learned;
associated with the plan; and
2. Dated and revised Cyber Security
3.1.3. Notify each person or group with
Incident response plan showing any
a defined role in the Cyber
changes based on the lessons
Security Incident response plan of
learned; and
the updates to the Cyber Security
Incident response plan based on 3. Evidence of plan update distribution
any documented lessons learned. including, but not limited to:
• Emails;
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 9 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-6 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Review, Update, and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their No later than 60 calendar days after a An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: change to the roles or responsibilities, not limited to:
Cyber Security Incident response groups or
• EACMS 1. Dated and revised Cyber Security
individuals, or technology that the
Incident response plan with
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and Responsible Entity determines would
changes to the roles or
their associated: impact the ability to execute the plan:
responsibilities, responders or
• EACMS 3.2.1. Update the Cyber Security technology; and
Incident response plan(s); and
2. Evidence of plan update
3.2.2. Notify each person or group with distribution including, but not
a defined role in the Cyber limited to:
Security Incident response plan of • Emails;
the updates. • USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system;
or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 10 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R4. Each Responsible Entity shall notify the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC) and, if subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States, the United States National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
(NCCIC),1 or their successors, of a Reportable Cyber Security Incident and a Cyber Security Incident that was an attempt to
compromise, as determined by applying the criteria from Requirement R1, Part 1.2.1, a system identified in the “Applicable
Systems” column, unless prohibited by law, in accordance with each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table
R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations
Assessment].
M4. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates notification of each determined
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and a Cyber Security Incident that was an attempt to compromise a system identified in
the “Applicable Systems” column according to the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R4 – Notifications and
Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents.
CIP-008-6 Table R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Initial notifications and updates shall Examples of evidence may include,
their associated: include the following attributes, at a but are not limited to, dated
minimum, to the extent known: documentation of initial notifications
• EACMS
and updates to the E-ISAC and NCCIC.
4.1.1 The functional impact;
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated: 4.1.2 The attack vector used; and
• EACMS 4.1.3 The level of intrusion that was
achieved or attempted.
1 The National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) is the successor organization of the Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team
(ICS-CERT). In 2017, NCCIC realigned its organizational structure and integrated like functions previously performed independently by the ICS-CERT and the United States
Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT).
Page 11 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-6 Table R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and After the Responsible Entity’s Examples of evidence may include,
their associated: determination made pursuant to but are not limited to, dated
documented process(es) in Requirement documentation of notices to the E-
• EACMS
R1, Part 1.2, provide initial notification ISAC and NCCIC.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems within the following timelines:
and their associated:
• One hour after the determination
• EACMS of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident.
• By the end of the next calendar day
after determination that a Cyber
Security Incident was an attempt to
compromise a system identified in
the “Applicable Systems” column
for this Part.
4.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Provide updates, if any, within 7 calendar Examples of evidence may include,
their associated: days of determination of new or changed but are not limited to, dated
attribute information required in Part 4.1. documentation of submissions to the
• EACMS
E-ISAC and NCCIC.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated:
• EACMS
Page 12 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
The Regional Entity shall serve as the Compliance Enforcement Authority (“CEA”) unless the
applicable entity is owned, operated, or controlled by the Regional Entity. In such cases the
ERO or a Regional Entity approved by FERC or other applicable governmental authority shall
serve as the CEA.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required to
retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence
retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask
an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period
since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified below
unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as part of an
investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard for
three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the
non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time specified
above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent
audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
• Compliance Audit
• Self-Certification
• Spot Checking
• Compliance Investigation
• Self-Reporting
• Complaint
1.4. Additional Compliance Information:
None
Page 13 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
2. Table of Compliance Elements
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Long Term Lower N/A N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has developed the Cyber has not developed a
Security Incident Cyber Security Incident
response plan(s), but the response plan with one
plan does not include or more processes to
the roles and identify, classify, and
responsibilities of Cyber respond to Cyber
Security Incident Security Incidents. (1.1)
response groups or
OR
individuals. (1.3)
The Responsible Entity
OR
has developed a Cyber
The Responsible Entity Security Incident
has developed the Cyber response plan, but the
Security Incident plan does not include
response plan(s), but the one or more processes
plan does not include to identify Reportable
incident handling Cyber Security Incidents
procedures for Cyber or a Cyber Security
Security Incidents. (1.4) Incident that was an
attempt to compromise,
OR
as determined by
The Responsible Entity applying the criteria
has developed a Cyber from Part 1.2.1, a
Security Incident system identified in the
response plan, but the “Applicable Systems”
plan does not include column for Part 1.2.
one or more processes (1.2)
to provide notification
Page 14 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
per Requirement R4.
(1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
has developed a Cyber
Security Incident
response plan, but the
plan does not include
one or more processes
that include criteria to
evaluate and define
attempts to
compromise. (1.2)
R2 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has not tested the Cyber has not tested the Cyber has not tested the Cyber has not tested the Cyber
Security Incident Security Incident Security Incident Security Incident
Real-time
response plan(s) within response plan(s) within response plan(s) within response plan(s) within
Operations
15 calendar months, not 16 calendar months, not 17 calendar months, not 18 calendar months
exceeding 16 calendar exceeding 17 calendar exceeding 18 calendar between tests of the
months between tests months between tests of months between tests of plan(s). (2.1)
of the plan(s). (2.1) the plan(s). (2.1) the plan(s). (2.1)
OR
OR
The Responsible Entity
The Responsible Entity did not retain relevant
did not document records related to
deviations, if any, from Reportable Cyber
the plan during a test or Security Incidents or
when a Reportable Cyber Security Incidents
Cyber Security Incident that were an attempt to
or a Cyber Security compromise a system
Incident that was an identified in the
Page 15 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
attempt to compromise “Applicable Systems”
a system identified in column for Part 2.3.
the “Applicable (2.3)
Systems” column for
Part 2.2 occurs. (2.2)
The Responsible Entity
R3 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
has not notified each
Assessment has not updated the has neither documented has neither documented
person or group with a
Cyber Security Incident lessons learned nor lessons learned nor
defined role in the
response plan based on documented the documented the
Cyber Security Incident
any documented lessons absence of any lessons absence of any lessons
response plan of
learned within 90 and learned within 90 and learned within 120
updates to the Cyber
less than 120 calendar less than 120 calendar calendar days of a test
Security Incident
days of a test or actual days of a test or actual or actual incident
response plan within
incident response to a incident response to a response to a
greater than 90 but less
Reportable Cyber Reportable Cyber Reportable Cyber
than 120 calendar days
Security Incident. (3.1.2) Security Incident. (3.1.1) Security Incident. (3.1.1)
of a test or actual
OR OR
incident response to a
Reportable Cyber The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Security Incident. (3.1.3) has not notified each has not updated the
person or group with a Cyber Security Incident
defined role in the Cyber response plan based on
Security Incident any documented lessons
response plan of learned within 120
updates to the Cyber calendar days of a test
Security Incident or actual incident
response plan within response to a
120 calendar days of a Reportable Cyber
test or actual incident Security Incident. (3.1.2)
response to a
OR
Page 16 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Reportable Cyber The Responsible Entity
Security Incident. (3.1.3) has not updated the
Cyber Security Incident
OR
response plan(s) or
The Responsible Entity notified each person or
has not updated the group with a defined
Cyber Security Incident role within 90 calendar
response plan(s) or days of any of the
notified each person or following changes that
group with a defined the responsible entity
role within 60 and less determines would
than 90 calendar days of impact the ability to
any of the following execute the plan: (3.2)
changes that the
• Roles or
responsible entity
responsibilities, or
determines would
• Cyber Security
impact the ability to
Incident response
execute the plan: (3.2)
groups or individuals, or
• Roles or • Technology changes.
responsibilities, or
• Cyber Security
Incident response
groups or individuals, or
• Technology changes.
The Responsible Entity
R4 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
notified E-ISAC and
Assessment failed to notify E-ISAC or notified E-ISAC and failed to notify E-ISAC
NCCIC, or their
NCCIC, or their NCCIC, or their and NCCIC, or their
successors, of a Cyber
successors, of a Cyber successors, of a successors, of a
Security Incident that
Security Incident that Reportable Cyber Reportable Cyber
was an attempt to
was an attempt to Security Incident but Security Incident. (R4)
compromise a system
compromise, as failed to notify or
identified in the
Page 17 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
“Applicable Systems” determined by applying update E-ISAC or NCCIC,
column for Part 4.2 but the criteria from or their successors,
failed to notify or Requirement R1, Part within the timelines
update E-ISAC or NCCIC, 1.2.1, a system pursuant to Part 4.2.
or their successors, identified in the (4.2)
within the timelines “Applicable Systems”
OR
pursuant to Part 4.2. column. (R4)
(4.2) The Responsible Entity
failed to notify E-ISAC or
OR
NCCIC, or their
The Responsible Entity
successors, of a
notified E-ISAC and
Reportable Cyber
NCCIC, or their
Security Incident. (R4)
successors, of a
Reportable Cyber
Security Incident or a
Cyber Security Incident
that was an attempt to
compromise a system
identified in the
“Applicable Systems”
column for Part 4.3 but
failed to report on one
or more of the
attributes within 7 days
after determination of
the attribute(s) not
reported pursuant to
Part 4.1. (4.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity
notified E-ISAC and
Page 18 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
NCCIC, or their
successors, of a
Reportable Cyber
Security Incident or a
Cyber Security Incident
that was an attempt to
compromise a system
identified in the
“Applicable Systems”
column for Part 4.1 but
failed to report on one
or more of the
attributes after
determination pursuant
to Part 4.1. (4.1)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
Page 19 of 20
CIP-008-6 - Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control center.” 3/24/06
Modifications to clarify the requirements and to
bring the compliance elements into conformance
with the latest guidelines for developing compliance
elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
2 9/30/09
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a Responsible
Entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
Updated version number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence pertaining
3 to removing component or system from service in
order to perform testing, in response to FERC order
issued September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Asset
4 12/30/10 Update
identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP standards
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
and to revise
format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-008-5.
CIP-008-5
Requirement R2,
FERC Letter Order issued approving VRFs and VSLs VSL table under
5 7/9/14
revisions to certain CIP standards. Severe, changed
from 19 to 18
calendar months.
Modified to
address directives
6 2/7/2019 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
in FERC Order No.
848
FERC order issued approving CIP-008-6. Docket No.
6 6/20/2019
RD19-3-000
Page 20 of 20
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-008-6.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-010-5.pdf ---
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability
Assessments
2. Number: CIP-010-5
3. Purpose: To prevent and detect unauthorized changes to BES Cyber Systems (BCS)
by specifying configuration change management and vulnerability
assessment requirements in support of protecting BCS from compromise
that could lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric System
(BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
Page 1 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in
this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-010-5:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
Page 2 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between Cyber Systems providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or
more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to define
the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Date: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan.”
Page 3 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) to manage configuration changes,
individually or by group, that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R1 –
Configuration Change Management. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
High impact BCS and their associated: Authorize changes that affect Applicable Examples of evidence may include, but are
1.1
Systems where those changes alter the not limited to, one or more documented
1. Electronic Access Control or
behavior of one or more cyber security process(es) that authorize changes that
Monitoring Systems (EACMS);
controls, excluding procedural and physical affect Applicable Systems where those
2. Physical Access Control Systems
controls, serving one or more requirement changes alter the behavior of one or more
(PACS); and
parts in CIP-005 or CIP-007, as defined by cyber security controls, excluding
3. Protected Cyber Asset (PCA) the Responsible Entity. procedural and physical controls, serving
one or more requirement parts in CIP-005
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
or CIP-007, as defined by the Responsible
1. EACMS;
Entity, such as:
2. PACS; and
• Change records documenting the
3. PCA
authorization.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this • Change records authorizing systems to
Part. automate changes to Applicable
Systems.
Examples of changes that may alter the
behavior of one or more cyber security
controls may include, but are not limited
to:
• Installation, removal, or update of
operating system, firmware, software,
or cyber security patches, including
changes to VCA parent images from
Page 4 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
which Applicable Systems will be
instantiated (CIP-007 R1.1, R2)
• Configuration changes that affect
routable protocol network accessibility
(CIP-007 R1.1)
• Configuration changes affecting the
establishment of, or access control
through, an ESP (CIP-005 R1, R2)
• Configuration of malicious code
prevention methods (CIP-007 R3)
• Configuration of security event
logging/alerting (CIP-007 R4)
• Configuration changes to
authentication methods (e.g., a
password enforcement policy change,
but not users changing their
password) (CIP-007 R5)
• Configuration changes to CPU/memory
sharing of VCAs on SCI (CIP-007 R1.3)
1.2 High impact BCS 1.2.1. Prior to implementing any change An example of evidence may include, but is
from Part 1.1 in the production not limited to, a list of cyber security
environment, except during a CIP controls tested along with successful test
Exceptional Circumstance, test the results and a list of differences between
changes in a test environment that the production and test environments with
minimizes differences with the descriptions of how any differences were
production environment or test the accounted for, including the date of the
changes in a production test, or logs from systems that
environment where the test is automatically remediate deviations in
performed in a manner that required cyber security controls in CIP-005
minimizes adverse effects, to ensure and CIP-007.
that required cyber security controls
in CIP-005 and CIP-007 are not
Page 5 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
adversely affected; and
1.2.2. Document the results of the testing
and, if a test environment was used,
the differences between the test
environment and the production
environment, including a description
of the measures used to account for
any differences in operation
between the test and production
environments.
1.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Prior to the installation of operating An example of evidence may include, but is
systems, firmware, software, or software not limited to a change request record that
1. EACMS; and
patches and when the method to do so is demonstrates the verification of identity of
2. PACS
available to the Responsible Entity from the the software source and integrity of the
Medium impact BCS and their associated: software source: software was performed prior to
1. EACMS; and installation or a process which documents
1.3.1. Verify the identity of the software
the mechanisms in place that would
2. PACS source; and
automatically ensure the identity of the
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this 1.3.2. Verify the integrity of the software software source and integrity of the
Part. obtained from the software source. software.
Note: Implementation does not require
the Responsible Entity to renegotiate or
abrogate existing contracts (including
amendments to master agreements and
purchase orders). Additionally, the
following issues are beyond the scope of
Part 1.6: (1) the actual terms and
conditions of a procurement contract; and
(2) vendor performance and adherence to
a contract.
Page 6 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.4 High impact BCS and their associated: As a part of the changes authorized per An example of evidence may include, but is
Part 1.1, verify that the behavior(s) of the not limited to:
1. EACMS;
altered cyber security controls were not
2. PACS; and • System generated evidence of
adversely affected.
automated verification of required
3. PCA
behaviors.
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
• Records from a verification process
1. EACMS;
showing that, as a part of the change
2. PACS; and
process, the required behavior(s) of the
3. PCA altered security controls remain
effective, were corrected, or the
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
change was reversed.
Part.
Page 7 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) to monitor configuration changes that
collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring. [Violation
Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-5 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
Methods to monitor, per system capability,
2.1 High impact BES Cyber Systems and their An example of evidence may include, but
at least once every 35 calendar days, for
associated: is not limited to, documented methods to
unauthorized changes that affect
monitor at least once every 35 calendar
1. EACMS; and
Applicable Systems, where those changes
days. Monitoring system configuration or
2. PCA alter the behavior of one or more cyber
procedural controls demonstrating
security controls, excluding procedural and
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
monitoring of at least one cyber security
physical controls, serving one or more
Part. control for 2.1.1 through 2.1.7.
requirement parts in CIP-007, as defined by
the Responsible Entity; that include at least Examples of evidence may include, but are
one cyber security control for each of the not limited to, reports generated from
following: automated tools or manual reviews along
with records of investigation for any
2.1.1. Configuration on each Applicable
unauthorized changes that were detected.
System that affects its routable
protocol network accessibility; Note: monitoring of VCA parent images
from which Applicable Systems will be
2.1.2. Configuration of CPU or memory
instantiated is an example of an
sharing of VCAs on SCI;
automated control for 2.1.3.
2.1.3. Installation, removal, and update of
operating system, firmware,
software, and cyber security
patches.
2.1.4. Configuration of malicious code
protection methods;
Page 8 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1.5. Configuration of security event
logging or alerting;
2.1.6. Configuration of authentication
methods; and
2.1.7. Changes to the enabled or disabled
status of accounts.
Document and investigate detected
unauthorized changes.
Page 9 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R3– Vulnerability Assessments. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long-term Planning and Operations Planning]
M3. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-5 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High impact BES Cyber Systems and their At least once every 15 calendar months, Examples of evidence may include, but are
associated: conduct a paper or active vulnerability not limited to:
1. EACMS; assessment. • A document listing the date of the
2. PACS; and assessment (performed at least once
every 15 calendar months), the
3. PCA
controls assessed for each BES Cyber
Medium impact BES Cyber Systems and
System along with the method of
their associated:
assessment; or
1. EACMS;
• A document listing the date of the
2. PACS; and
assessment and the output of any
3. PCA
tools used to perform the assessment.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part.
Page 10 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.2 High impact BES Cyber Systems. At least once every 36 calendar months, An example of evidence may include, but
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this per system capability: is not limited to, a document listing the
Part. 3.2.1 Perform an active vulnerability date of the assessment (performed at
assessment in a test environment least once every 36 calendar months), the
output of the tools used to perform the
that minimizes differences with the
assessment, and a list of differences
production environment, or perform
an active vulnerability assessment in between the production and test
a production environment where the environments with descriptions of how
test is performed in a manner that any differences were accounted for in
minimizes adverse effects; and conducting the assessment.
3.2.2 Document the results of the testing
and, if a test environment was used,
the differences between the test
environment and the production
environment, including a description
of the measures used to account for
any differences in operation
between the test and production
environments.
3.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Prior to becoming a new Applicable An example of evidence may include, but
1. EACMS; and System, perform an active vulnerability is not limited to:
assessment of the new Applicable System,
2. PCA • The output of tools used to perform
except for:
the assessment; or
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
• Like replacements or additions with a
Part. • Reports from automated assessment
previously assessed configuration of
and remediation mechanisms
an existing Applicable System; or
(remediation VLANs, quarantine
• CIP Exceptional Circumstances. systems, 802.1x mechanisms that
assess and remediate, etc.)
that documents the date of the
assessment performed prior to becoming
a new Applicable System.
Page 11 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.4 High impact BCS and their associated: Document the results of the assessments Examples of evidence may include, but are
conducted according to Parts 3.1, 3.2, and not limited to:
1. EACMS;
3.3 and the action plan to remediate or
2. PACS; and • Reports or logs from automated
mitigate vulnerabilities identified in the
mechanisms that perform
3. PCA
assessments including the planned date of
remediation of VCAs at instantiation;
Medium impact BCS and their
completing the action plan and the execution
or
associated:
status of any remediation or mitigation
• Documentation listing the results or
1. EACMS; action items.
the review or assessment, a list of
2. PACS; and
action items, documented proposed
3. PCA
dates of completion for the action
SCI supporting an Applicable System in plan, and records of the status of the
this Part. action items (such as minutes of a
status meeting, updates in a work
order system, or a spreadsheet
tracking the action items).
R4. Each Responsible Entity, for its high impact and medium impact BES Cyber Systems, associated PCA, and associated SCI,
shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or more documented plan(s) for Transient Cyber Assets
(TCA) and Removable Media that include the sections in Attachment 1. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon:
Long-term Planning and Operations Planning]
M4. Evidence shall include each of the documented plan(s) for TCAs and Removable Media that collectively include each of the
applicable sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation of plan(s) for TCA and
Removable Media. Additional examples of evidence per section are located in Attachment 2. If a Responsible Entity does
not use TCA(s) or Removable Media, examples of evidence include, but are not limited to, a statement, policy, or other
document that states the Responsible Entity does not use TCA(s) or Removable Media.
Page 12 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise
designated by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective
roles of monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and
enforceable Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to
demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period
specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask
an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-
time period since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved
or for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and
submitted subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program”
refers to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data
or information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with
the associated Reliability Standard.
Page 13 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity’s The Responsible Entity change
R1. The Responsible Entity neither
change management management process(es) did
documented nor implemented
process(es) does not include not include authorization for
any change management
one of the required items changes as required in Part
process(es) that include
listed in 1.2.1 through 1.2.2. 1.1. (Part 1.1)
required items in Part 1.1
(Requirement R1 Part 1.2);
OR through Part 1.4.
OR (Requirement R1)
The Responsible Entity’s
The Responsible Entity’s change management
change management process(es) does not include
process(es) does not include the two required items listed
one of the required items in 1.2.1 through 1.2.2. (Part
listed in 1.3.1 through 1.3.2. 1.2);
(Part 1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity’s
change management
process(es) does not include
the two required items listed
in 1.3.1 through 1.3.2. (Part
1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity’s
change management
process(es) does not include
verification, as required by
Part 1.4. (Part 1.4)
The Responsible Entity’s The Responsible Entity’s The Responsible Entity neither
R2. The Responsible Entity did not
documented and implemented documented and implemented documented nor implemented
monitor within 35 calendar
configuration monitoring configuration monitoring a configuration monitoring
days, but less than 70 calendar
process(es) does not include process(es) does not include process(es); or the process
days as required by Part 2.1.
one or two of the required three or four of the required does not include five or more
Page 14 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Parts 2.1.1 through 2.1.7 for Parts 2.1.1 through 2.1.7 for of the required Parts 2.1.1
Applicable Systems as required Applicable Systems as required through 2.1.7 for Applicable
in Part 2.1. in Part 2.1. Systems as required in Part
2.1.
OR OR
OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
monitor within 70 calendar monitor within 105 calendar The Responsible Entity did not
days, but less than 105 days, but less than 140 monitor within 140 calendar
calendar days as required by calendar days as required by days or more as required by
Part 2.1. Part 2.1. Part 2.1.
OR
The Responsible Entity neither
documented nor investigated
detected unauthorized
changes. (Part 2.1)
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not
R3.
performed a vulnerability performed a vulnerability performed a vulnerability implement any vulnerability
assessment more than 15 assessment more than 18 assessment more than 21 assessment processes for one
months, but less than 18 months, but less than 21 months, but less than 24 of its Applicable Systems.
months, since the last months, since the last months, since the last (Requirement R3)
assessment on one of its assessment on one of its assessment on one of its
OR
Applicable Systems. (Part 3.1) Applicable Systems. (Part 3.1) Applicable Systems. (Part 3.1)
The Responsible Entity
OR OR OR
performed a vulnerability
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity assessment more than 24
performed an active performed an active performed an active months since the last
vulnerability assessment more vulnerability assessment more vulnerability assessment more assessment on one of its
than 36 months, but less than than 39 months, but less than than 42 months, but less than applicable BES Cyber Systems.
39 months, since the last 42 months, since the last 45 months, since the last (Part 3.1)
active assessment on one of its active assessment on one of its active assessment on one of its
OR
Applicable Systems. (Part 3.2) Applicable Systems. (Part 3.2) Applicable Systems. (Part 3.2)
The Responsible Entity
performed an active
vulnerability assessment more
Page 15 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
than 45 months since the last
active assessment on one of its
applicable BES Cyber Systems.
(Part 3.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
perform the active
vulnerability assessment of a
Cyber System prior to it
becoming an Applicable
Systems. (Part 3.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
implemented one or more
documented vulnerability
assessment processes for each
of its Applicable Systems, but
has not documented the
results of the vulnerability
assessments, the action plans
to remediate or mitigate
vulnerabilities identified in the
assessments, the planned date
of completion of the action
plan, and the execution status
of the mitigation plans. (Part
3.4)
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
R4. The Responsible Entity did not
manage its Transient Cyber implement the Removable authorize its TCA(s) according
document or implement one
Asset(s) according to Media sections according to to Attachment 1, Section 1.2.
or more plan(s) for TCAs and
Attachment 1, Section 1.1. Attachment 1, Section 3. (R4)
Removable Media according to
(Requirement R4) (Requirement R4)
Page 16 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
OR OR OR Requirement R4. (Requirement
R4)
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
document the Removable document mitigation of implement mitigation of
Media sections according to software vulnerabilities, software vulnerabilities,
Attachment 1, Section 3. mitigation for the introduction mitigation for the introduction
(Requirement R4) of malicious code, or of malicious code, or
mitigation of the risk of mitigation of the risk of
OR
unauthorized use for TCA unauthorized use for TCAs
The Responsible Entity did not
managed by the Responsible managed by the Responsible
document authorization for
Entity according to Attachment Entity according to Attachment
TCA managed by the
1, Sections 1.3, 1.4, and 1.5. 1, Sections 1.3, 1.4, and 1.5.
Responsible Entity according to
(Requirement R4) (Requirement R4)
Attachment 1, Section 1.2.
OR OR
(Requirement R4)
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
document mitigation of implement mitigation of
software vulnerabilities or software vulnerabilities or
mitigation for the introduction mitigation for the introduction
of malicious code for Transient of malicious code for TCAs
Cyber Assets managed by a managed by a party other than
party other than the the Responsible Entity
Responsible Entity according to according to Attachment 1,
Attachment 1, Sections 2.1, Sections 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3.
2.2, and 2.3. (Requirement R4) (Requirement R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-010-5 Technical Rationale
Page 17 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Developed to define the
configuration change
management and vulnerability
assessment requirements in
coordination with other CIP
standards and to address the
balance of the FERC directives in
its Order 706.
1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-010-1.
(Order becomes effective on 2/3/14.)
2 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two FERC directives
from Order No. 791 related to
identify, assess, and correct
language and communication
networks.
2 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the version adopted by
the Board on 11/13/2014. Revised
version addresses remaining
directives from Order No. 791
related to transient devices and
low impact BES Cyber Systems.
2 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-010-3.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
3 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address certain
directives in FERC Order No. 829.
3 10/18/2018 FERC Order approving CIP-010-3. Docket
No. RM17-13-000.
4 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address directives in
FERC Order No. 850.
4 3/18/2021 FERC order approving Docket No. RD21-
2-000
5 5/9/2024 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Virtualization Modifications under
Project 2016-02
Page 18 of 24
Attachment
Attachment 1
Required Sections for Plans for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in their plan(s) for
Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media as required under Requirement R4.
Section 1. TCA(s) Managed by the Responsible Entity.
1.1. TCA Management: Responsible Entities shall manage TCA(s), individually or
by group: (1) in an ongoing manner to ensure compliance with applicable
requirements at all times, (2) in an on-demand manner applying the
applicable requirements before connection, or (3) a combination of both (1)
and (2) above.
1.2. TCA Authorization: For each individual or group of TCA(s), each Responsible
Entity shall authorize:
1.2.1. Users, either individually or by group or role;
1.2.2. Locations, either individually or by group; and
1.2.3. Uses, which shall be limited to what is necessary to perform business
functions.
1.3. Software Vulnerability Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the following
methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of vulnerabilities
posed by unpatched software on the TCA (per TCA capability):
• Security patching, including manual or managed updates;
• System hardening; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities.
1.4. Introduction of Malicious Code Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of
introduction of malicious code (per TCA capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting;
• Live operating system and software executable only from read only
media;
• System hardening; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
1.5. Unauthorized Use Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the following
methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of unauthorized use
of TCA(s):
Page 19 of 24
Attachment
• Restrict physical access;
• Full-disk encryption with authentication;
• Multi-factor authentication; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the risk of unauthorized use.
Section 2. TCA(s) Managed by a Party Other than the Responsible Entity.
2.1. Software Vulnerabilities Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of
vulnerabilities posed by unpatched software on the TCA (per TCA capability):
• Review of installed security patch(es);
• Review of security patching process used by the party;
• Review of other vulnerability mitigation performed by the party; or
• Review of other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities.
2.2. Introduction of malicious code mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of
introduction of malicious code (per TCA capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review use of live operating system and software executable only from
read only media;
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
• Review of other method(s) to mitigate the risk of introduction of
malicious code.
2.3. For any method used as specified in 2.1 and 2.2, Responsible Entities shall
determine whether any additional mitigation actions are necessary and
implement such actions prior to connecting the TCA.
Section 3. Removable Media
3.1. Removable Media Authorization: For each individual or group of Removable
Media, each Responsible Entity shall authorize:
3.1.1. Users, either individually or by group or role; and
3.1.2. Locations, either individually or by group.
3.2. Malicious Code Mitigation: To achieve the objective of mitigating the threat
of introducing malicious code, each Responsible Entity shall:
Page 20 of 24
Attachment
3.2.1. Use method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media prior to
connecting ; and
3.2.2. Mitigate the threat of detected malicious code.
Page 21 of 24
Attachment
CIP-010-5 - Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Plans for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media
Section 1.1: Examples of evidence for Section 1.1 may include, but are not limited to, the
method(s) of management for the TCA(s). This can be included as part of the TCA(s),
part of the documentation related to authorization of TCA(s) managed by the
Responsible Entity or part of a security policy.
Section 1.2: Examples of evidence for Section 1.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from asset management systems, human resource management
systems, or forms or spreadsheets that show authorization of TCA(s) managed by
the Responsible Entity. Alternatively, this can be documented in the overarching
plan document.
Section 1.3: Examples of evidence for Section 1.3 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the risk of software vulnerabilities
posed by unpatched software such as security patch management implementation,
the use of live operating system and software executable only from read only media,
the use of controls that maintain the state of the operating system and software
such that it is in a known state prior to execution, system hardening practices or
other method(s) to mitigate the risk of software vulnerability posed by unpatched
software. Evidence can be from change management systems, automated patch
management solutions, procedures or processes associated with using live
operating systems, methods to maintain the known good state of the OS and all
software, or system hardening practices. If a TCA does not have the capability to use
method(s) that mitigate the risk from unpatched software, evidence may include
documentation by the vendor or Responsible Entity that identifies that the TCA does
not have the capability.
Section 1.4: Examples of evidence for Section 1.4 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious code
such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern updates,
application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication, or other
method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a Transient Cyber Asset
does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the introduction of
malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the vendor or Responsible
Entity that identifies that the TCA does not have the capability.
Section 1.5: Examples of evidence for Section 1.5 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation through policies or procedures of the method(s) to restrict physical
access; method(s) of the full-disk encryption solution along with the authentication
protocol; method(s) of the multi-factor authentication solution; or documentation
of other method(s) to mitigate the risk of unauthorized use.
Section 2.1: Examples of evidence for Section 2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or procedures
that document a review of installed security patch(es); memoranda, electronic mail,
Page 22 of 24
Attachment
policies or contracts from parties other than the Responsible Entity that identify the
security patching process or vulnerability mitigation performed by the party other
than the Responsible Entity; memoranda, electronic mail, policies or contracts from
parties other than the Responsible Entity that that document a review of the use of
live operating system and software executable only from read only media;
memoranda, electronic mail, policies, or contracts from parties other than the
Responsible Entity that that document a review of the use of controls that maintain
the state of the operating system and software such that it is in a known state prior
to execution; evidence from change management systems, electronic mail, system
documentation or contracts that identifies acceptance by the Responsible Entity
that the practices of the party other than the Responsible Entity are acceptable; or
documentation of other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities for TCA(s)
managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity. If a TCA does not have the
capability to use method(s) that mitigate the risk from unpatched software,
evidence may include documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party other
than the Responsible Entity that identifies that the TCA does not have the capability.
Section 2.2: Examples of evidence for Section 2.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or procedures
that document a review of the installed antivirus update level; memoranda,
electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from the party other
than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update process, the use of
application whitelisting, and system hardening by the party other than the
Responsible Entity; evidence from change management systems, electronic mail or
contracts that identifies the Responsible Entity’s acceptance that the practices of
the party other than the Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of
other method(s) to mitigate malicious code for TCA(s) managed by a party other
than the Responsible Entity. If a TCA does not have the capability to use method(s)
that mitigate the introduction of malicious code, evidence may include
documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party other than the Responsible
Entity that identifies that the TCA does not have the capability.
Section 2.3: Examples of evidence for Section 2.3 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or contracts
that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigations are necessary
and that they have been implemented prior to connecting the TCA managed by a
party other than the Responsible Entity.
Section 3.1: Examples of evidence for Section 3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from asset management systems, human resource management
systems, forms or spreadsheets that shows authorization of Removable Media. The
documentation must identify Removable Media, individually or by group of
Removable Media, along with the authorized users, either individually or by group
or role, and the authorized locations, either individually or by group.
Page 23 of 24
Attachment
Section 3.2: Examples of evidence for Section 3.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to mitigate malicious code such as
results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on-demand
scanning. Documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating the threat
of detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the method(s)
used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and that show
mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or documented
confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed to be free of
malicious code.
Page 24 of 24
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-010-5.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-006-6.pdf ---
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
2. Number: CIP‐006‐6
3. Purpose: To manage physical access to Bulk Electric System (BES) Cyber Systems by
specifying a physical security plan in support of protecting BES Cyber
Systems against compromise that could lead to misoperation or
instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained
herein, the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional
entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the
functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities, systems,
and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load shedding
(UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Special Protection System (SPS) or Remedial Action Scheme (RAS)
where the SPS or RAS is subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or
Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Interchange Coordinator or Interchange Authority
4.1.6 Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
4.1.7 Transmission Operator
4.1.8 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above
are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each SPS or RAS where the SPS or RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP‐006‐6:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security Perimeters.
4.2.3.3 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant to 10
C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not included
in section 4.2.1 above.
Page 2 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
4.2.3.5 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber Systems
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the CIP‐002‐5.1
identification and categorization processes.
5. Effective Dates:
See Implementation Plan for CIP‐006‐6.
6. Background:
Standard CIP‐006 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber security,
which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems and
require a minimum level of organizational, operational and procedural controls to
mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements.
An entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented
processes, but it must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident
response plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an
approach involving multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the
standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training
program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be
referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any
additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented
processes. These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records
of compliance and should not be viewed as an all‐inclusive list.
Page 3 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk
Electric System. A review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability
standards for UFLS program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of
300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems
to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management
Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact
and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used in the
“Applicable Systems” column as described.
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP‐002‐5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP‐002‐5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems without External Routable Connectivity –
Only applies to medium impact BES Cyber Systems without External Routable
Connectivity.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity – Only
applies to medium impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity.
This also excludes Cyber Assets in the BES Cyber System that cannot be directly
accessed through External Routable Connectivity.
 Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced high
impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples may
include, but are not limited to, firewalls, authentication servers, and log
monitoring and alerting systems.
 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access Control
System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium
impact BES Cyber System.
Page 4 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
 Protected Cyber Assets (PCA) – Applies to each Protected Cyber Asset associated
with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber
System.
 Locally mounted hardware or devices at the Physical Security Perimeter –
Applies to the locally mounted hardware or devices (e.g. such as motion sensors,
electronic lock control mechanisms, and badge readers) at a Physical Security
Perimeter associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium
impact BES Cyber System with External Routable Connectivity, and that does not
contain or store access control information or independently perform access
authentication. These hardware and devices are excluded in the definition of
Physical Access Control Systems.
Page 5 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented physical security plan(s) that collectively include all of
the applicable requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long Term Planning and Same Day Operations].
M1. Evidence must include each of the documented physical security plans that collectively include all of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation
of the plan or plans as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems Define operational or procedural controls An example of evidence may include, but
without External Routable Connectivity to restrict physical access. is not limited to, documentation that
operational or procedural controls exist.
Physical Access Control Systems (PACS)
associated with:
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems, or
 Medium Impact BES Cyber
Systems with External Routable
Connectivity
1.2 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with Utilize at least one physical access control An example of evidence may include, but
External Routable Connectivity and their to allow unescorted physical access into is not limited to, language in the physical
associated: each applicable Physical Security security plan that describes each Physical
1. EACMS; and Perimeter to only those individuals who Security Perimeter and how unescorted
have authorized unescorted physical physical access is controlled by one or
2. PCA
access. more different methods and proof that
unescorted physical access is restricted to
only authorized individuals, such as a list
of authorized individuals accompanied by
access logs.
Page 6 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Where technically feasible, utilize two or An example of evidence may include, but
associated: more different physical access controls is not limited to, language in the physical
1. EACMS; and
(this does not require two completely security plan that describes the Physical
independent physical access control Security Perimeters and how unescorted
2. PCA
systems) to collectively allow unescorted physical access is controlled by two or
physical access into Physical Security more different methods and proof that
Perimeters to only those individuals who unescorted physical access is restricted to
have authorized unescorted physical only authorized individuals, such as a list
access. of authorized individuals accompanied by
access logs.
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Monitor for unauthorized access through An example of evidence may include, but
associated: a physical access point into a Physical is not limited to, documentation of
1. EACMS; and
Security Perimeter. controls that monitor for unauthorized
access through a physical access point into
2. PCA
a Physical Security Perimeter.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
Page 7 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Issue an alarm or alert in response to An example of evidence may include, but
associated: detected unauthorized access through a is not limited to, language in the physical
1. EACMS; and
physical access point into a Physical security plan that describes the issuance
Security Perimeter to the personnel of an alarm or alert in response to
2. PCA
identified in the BES Cyber Security unauthorized access through a physical
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
Incident response plan within 15 minutes access control into a Physical Security
External Routable Connectivity and their
of detection. Perimeter and additional evidence that
associated:
the alarm or alert was issued and
1. EACMS; and communicated as identified in the BES
Cyber Security Incident Response Plan,
2. PCA
such as manual or electronic alarm or
alert logs, cell phone or pager logs, or
other evidence that documents that the
alarm or alert was generated and
communicated.
1.6 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) Monitor each Physical Access Control An example of evidence may include, but
associated with: System for unauthorized physical access is not limited to, documentation of
to a Physical Access Control System. controls that monitor for unauthorized
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems,
or
physical access to a PACS.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber
Systems with External Routable
Connectivity
Page 8 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.7 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) Issue an alarm or alert in response to An example of evidence may include, but
associated with: detected unauthorized physical access to is not limited to, language in the physical
a Physical Access Control System to the security plan that describes the issuance
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems,
personnel identified in the BES Cyber of an alarm or alert in response to
or
Security Incident response plan within 15 unauthorized physical access to Physical
 Medium Impact BES Cyber
minutes of the detection. Access Control Systems and additional
Systems with External Routable
evidence that the alarm or alerts was
Connectivity
issued and communicated as identified in
the BES Cyber Security Incident Response
Plan, such as alarm or alert logs, cell
phone or pager logs, or other evidence
that the alarm or alert was generated and
communicated.
1.8 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Log (through automated means or by An example of evidence may include, but
associated: personnel who control entry) entry of is not limited to, language in the physical
1. EACMS; and
each individual with authorized security plan that describes logging and
unescorted physical access into each recording of physical entry into each
2. PCA
Physical Security Perimeter, with Physical Security Perimeter and additional
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
information to identify the individual and evidence to demonstrate that this logging
External Routable Connectivity and their
date and time of entry. has been implemented, such as logs of
associated:
physical access into Physical Security
1. EACMS; and Perimeters that show the individual and
the date and time of entry into Physical
2. PCA
Security Perimeter.
1.9 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Retain physical access logs of entry of An example of evidence may include, but
associated: individuals with authorized unescorted is not limited to, dated documentation
1. EACMS; and physical access into each Physical Security such as logs of physical access into
Perimeter for at least ninety calendar Physical Security Perimeters that show the
2. PCA
days. date and time of entry into Physical
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
Security Perimeter.
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
Page 9 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.10 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Restrict physical access to cabling and other An example of evidence may include, but
their associated: nonprogrammable communication is not limited to, records of the
components used for connection between Responsible Entity’s implementation of
 PCA
applicable Cyber Assets within the same the physical access restrictions (e.g.,
Electronic Security Perimeter in those cabling and components secured through
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
instances when such cabling and components conduit or secured cable trays)
Control Centers and their associated:
are located outside of a Physical Security encryption, monitoring, or equally
 PCA
Perimeter. effective logical protections.
Where physical access restrictions to such
cabling and components are not
implemented, the Responsible Entity shall
document and implement one or more of the
following:
 encryption of data that transits such
cabling and components; or
 monitoring the status of the
communication link composed of
such cabling and components and
issuing an alarm or alert in response
to detected communication failures
to the personnel identified in the BES
Cyber Security Incident response plan
within 15 minutes of detection; or
 an equally effective logical
protection.
Page 10 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented visitor control program(s) that include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon:
Same Day Operations.]
M2. Evidence must include one or more documented visitor control programs that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP‐006‐6 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Require continuous escorted access of An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: visitors (individuals who are provided not limited to, language in a visitor control
1. EACMS; and access but are not authorized for program that requires continuous escorted
2. PCA
unescorted physical access) within each access of visitors within Physical Security
Physical Security Perimeter, except during Perimeters and additional evidence to
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
CIP Exceptional Circumstances. demonstrate that the process was
External Routable Connectivity and their
implemented, such as visitor logs.
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Require manual or automated logging of An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: visitor entry into and exit from the Physical not limited to, language in a visitor control
1. EACMS; and Security Perimeter that includes date and program that requires continuous escorted
2. PCA
time of the initial entry and last exit, the access of visitors within Physical Security
visitor’s name, and the name of an Perimeters and additional evidence to
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
individual point of contact responsible for demonstrate that the process was
External Routable Connectivity and their
the visitor, except during CIP Exceptional implemented, such as dated visitor logs
associated:
Circumstances. that include the required information.
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
Page 11 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Retain visitor logs for at least ninety An example of evidence may include, but
associated: calendar days. is not limited to, documentation showing
1. EACMS; and logs have been retained for at least ninety
2. PCA
calendar days.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
Page 12 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented Physical Access Control System maintenance and testing
program(s) that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R3 – Maintenance and Testing
Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M3. Evidence must include each of the documented Physical Access Control System maintenance and testing programs that
collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R3 – Maintenance and Testing Program and
additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP‐006‐6 Table R3 – Physical Access Control System Maintenance and Testing Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirement Measures
3.1 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) Maintenance and testing of each Physical An example of evidence may include, but
associated with: Access Control System and locally mounted is not limited to, a maintenance and testing
hardware or devices at the Physical program that provides for testing each
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems, or
Security Perimeter at least once every 24 Physical Access Control System and locally
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems calendar months to ensure they function mounted hardware or devices associated
with External Routable Connectivity properly. with each applicable Physical Security
Perimeter at least once every 24 calendar
Locally mounted hardware or devices at
months and additional evidence to
the Physical Security Perimeter associated
demonstrate that this testing was done,
with:
such as dated maintenance records, or
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems, or other documentation showing testing and
maintenance has been performed on each
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
applicable device or system at least once
with External Routable Connectivity
every 24 calendar months.
Page 13 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing
compliance with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where
the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last
audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was
compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time
as part of an investigation:
 Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard
for three calendar years.
 If a Responsible Entity is found non‐compliant, it shall keep information related to
the non‐compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time
specified above, whichever is longer.
 The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
Compliance Audits
Self‐Certifications
Spot Checking
Compliance Investigations
Self‐Reporting
Complaints
1.4. Additional Compliance Information:
None
Page 14 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
2. Table of Compliance Elements
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Long Term Medium N/A N/A N/A The Responsible Entity did
Planning not document or
implement physical
Same‐Day
security plans. (R1)
Operations
OR
The Responsible Entity did
not document or
implement operational or
procedural controls to
restrict physical access.
(1.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
documented and
implemented physical
access controls, but at
least one control does not
exist to restrict access to
Applicable Systems. (1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
documented and
implemented physical
access controls, but at
least two different
controls do not exist to
Page 15 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
restrict access to
Applicable Systems. (1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
monitor for unauthorized
access through a physical
access point into a
Physical Security
Perimeter. (1.4)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
alert for detected
unauthorized access
through a physical access
point into a Physical
Security Perimeter or to
communicate such alerts
within 15 minutes to
identified personnel. (1.5)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
monitor each Physical
Access Control System for
unauthorized physical
access to a Physical Access
Page 16 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Control Systems. (1.6)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
alert for unauthorized
physical access to Physical
Access Control Systems or
to communicate such
alerts within 15 minutes to
identified personnel. (1.7)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
log authorized physical
entry into each Physical
Security Perimeter with
sufficient information to
identify the individual and
date and time of entry.
(1.8)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
retain physical access logs
for 90 calendar days. (1.9)
OR
The Responsible Entity did
not document or
Page 17 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
implement physical access
restrictions, encryption,
monitoring or equally
effective logical
protections for cabling
and other
nonprogrammable
communication
components used for
connection between
applicable Cyber Assets
within the same Electronic
Security Perimeter in
those instances when such
cabling and components
are located outside of a
Physical Security
Perimeter. (1.10)
R2 Same‐Day Medium N/A N/A N/A The Responsible Entity has
Operations failed to include or
implement a visitor
control program that
requires continuous
escorted access of visitors
within any Physical
Security Perimeter. (2.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
failed to include or
Page 18 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
implement a visitor
control program that
requires logging of the
initial entry and last exit
dates and times of the
visitor, the visitor’s name,
and the point of contact.
(2.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
failed to include or
implement a visitor
control program to retain
visitor logs for at least
ninety days. (2.3)
R3 Long Term Medium The The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning Responsible has documented and has documented and did not document or
Entity has implemented a implemented a implement a
documented maintenance and maintenance and maintenance and
and testing program for testing program for testing program for
implemented a Physical Access Control Physical Access Control Physical Access Control
maintenance Systems and locally Systems and locally Systems and locally
and testing mounted hardware or mounted hardware or mounted hardware or
program for devices at the Physical devices at the Physical devices at the Physical
Physical Access Security Perimeter, but Security Perimeter, but Security Perimeter. (3.1)
Control did not complete did not complete
OR
Systems and required testing within required testing within
The Responsible Entity
locally 25 calendar months but 26 calendar months but
Page 19 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
mounted did complete required did complete required has documented and
hardware or testing within 26 testing within 27 implemented a
devices at the calendar months. (3.1) calendar months. (3.1) maintenance and
Physical testing program for
Security Physical Access Control
Perimeter, but Systems and locally
did not mounted hardware or
complete devices at the Physical
required Security Perimeter, but
testing within did not complete
24 calendar required testing within
months but did 27 calendar months.
complete (3.1)
required
testing within
25 calendar
months. (3.1)
Page 20 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements
and to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from ‐2 to ‐3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or
system from service in order to perform
testing, in response to FERC order issued
September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP standards
and to revise
Page 21 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Version Date Action Change Tracking
format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐006‐5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed FERC
directives from
Order No. 791.
6 1/21/16 FERC order issued approving CIP‐006‐6.
Docket No. RM15‐14‐000
Page 22 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Section 4 – Scope of Applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Standards
Section “4. Applicability” of the standards provides important information for Responsible
Entities to determine the scope of the applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Requirements.
Section “4.1. Functional Entities” is a list of NERC functional entities to which the standard
applies. If the entity is registered as one or more of the functional entities listed in Section 4.1,
then the NERC CIP Cyber Security Standards apply. Note that there is a qualification in Section
4.1 that restricts the applicability in the case of Distribution Providers to only those that own
certain types of systems and equipment listed in 4.2.
Section “4.2. Facilities” defines the scope of the Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by
the Responsible Entity, as qualified in Section 4.1, that is subject to the requirements of the
standard. As specified in the exemption section 4.2.3.5, this standard does not apply to
Responsible Entities that do not have High Impact or Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems under
CIP‐002‐5.1’s categorization. In addition to the set of BES Facilities, Control Centers, and other
systems and equipment, the list includes the set of systems and equipment owned by
Distribution Providers. While the NERC Glossary term “Facilities” already includes the BES
characteristic, the additional use of the term BES here is meant to reinforce the scope of
applicability of these Facilities where it is used, especially in this applicability scoping section.
This in effect sets the scope of Facilities, systems, and equipment that is subject to the
standards.
General:
While the focus of this Reliability Standard has shifted away from the definition and
management of a completely enclosed “six‐wall” boundary, it is expected that in many
instances a six‐wall boundary will remain a primary mechanism for controlling, alerting, and
logging access to BES Cyber Systems. Taken together, these controls outlined below will
effectively constitute the physical security plan to manage physical access to BES Cyber
Systems.
Requirement R1:
Methods of physical access control include:
 Card Key: A means of electronic access where the access rights of the card holder are
predefined in a computer database. Access rights may differ from one perimeter to
another.
 Special Locks: These include, but are not limited to, locks with “restricted key” systems,
magnetic locks that can be operated remotely, and “man‐trap” systems.
 Security Personnel: Personnel responsible for controlling physical access who may reside
on‐site or at a monitoring station.
Page 23 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
 Other Authentication Devices: Biometric, keypad, token, or other equivalent devices that
control physical access into the Physical Security Perimeter.
Methods to monitor physical access include:
 Alarm Systems: Systems that alarm to indicate interior motion or when a door, gate, or
window has been opened without authorization. These alarms must provide for
notification within 15 minutes to individuals responsible for response.
 Human Observation of Access Points: Monitoring of physical access points by security
personnel who are also controlling physical access.
Methods to log physical access include:
 Computerized Logging: Electronic logs produced by the Responsible Entity’s selected access
control and alerting method.
 Video Recording: Electronic capture of video images of sufficient quality to determine
identity.
 Manual Logging: A log book or sign‐in sheet, or other record of physical access maintained
by security or other personnel authorized to control and monitor physical access.
The FERC Order No. 706, Paragraph 572, directive discussed utilizing two or more different and
complementary physical access controls to provide defense in depth. It does not require two or
more Physical Security Perimeters, nor does it exclude the use of layered perimeters. Use of
two‐factor authentication would be acceptable at the same entry points for a non‐layered
single perimeter. For example, controls for a sole perimeter could include either a combination
of card key and pin code (something you know and something you have), or a card key and
biometric scanner (something you have and something you are), or a physical key in
combination with a guard‐monitored remote camera and door release, where the “guard” has
adequate information to authenticate the person the guard is observing or talking to prior to
permitting access (something you have and something you are). The two‐factor authentication
could be implemented using a single Physical Access Control System but more than one
authentication method must be utilized. For physically layered protection, a locked gate in
combination with a locked control‐building could be acceptable, provided no single
authenticator (e.g., key or card key) would provide access through both.
Entities may choose for certain PACS to reside in a PSP controlling access to applicable BES
Cyber Systems. For these PACS, there is no additional obligation to comply with Requirement
Parts 1.1, 1.6 and 1.7 beyond what is already required for the PSP.
The new requirement part CIP‐006‐6, Requirement R1, Part 1.10 responds to the directive
found in FERC Order No. 791, Paragraph 150. The requirement intends to protect cabling and
nonprogrammable communication components that are within an ESP, but extend outside of a
PSP. This protection, similar to the FERC Approved NERC Petition on the interpretation on CIP‐
006‐2 from PacifiCorp, must be accomplished either by physically protecting the cabling and
components that leave a PSP (such as by conduit or secured cable trays) or through data
encryption, circuit monitoring, or equally effective logical protections. It is intended that the
Page 24 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
physical protections reduce the possibility of tampering or allowing direct access to the
nonprogrammable devices. Conduit, secured cable trays, and secured communication closets
are examples of these types of protections. These physical security measures should be
implemented in such a way that they would provide some mechanism to detect or recognize
that someone could have tampered with the cabling and non‐programmable components. This
could be something as simple as a padlock on a communications closet where the entity would
recognize if the padlock had been cut off. Alternatively, this protection may also be
accomplished through the use of armored cabling or via the stainless steel or aluminum tube
protecting the fiber inside an optical ground wire (OPGW) cable. In using any of these methods,
care should be taken to protect the entire length of the cabling including any termination points
that may be outside of a defined PSP.
This requirement part only covers those portions of cabling and nonprogrammable
communications components that are located outside of the PSP, but inside the ESP. Where
this cabling and non‐programmable communications components exist inside the PSP, this
requirement part no longer applies.
The requirement focuses on physical protection of the communications cabling and
components as this is a requirement in a physical security standard and the gap in protection
identified by FERC in Order 791 is one of physical protections. However, the requirement part
recognizes that there is more than one way to provide protection to communication cabling
and nonprogrammable components. In particular, the requirement provides a mechanism for
entities to select an alternative to physical security protection that may be chosen in a situation
where an entity cannot implement physical security or simply chooses not to implement
physical security. The entity is under no obligation to justify or explain why it chose logical
protections over physical protections identified in the requirement.
The alternative protective measures identified in the CIP‐006‐6 R1, Part 1.10 (encryption and
circuit monitoring) were identified as acceptable alternatives in NERC petition of the PacifiCorp
Interpretation of CIP‐006‐2 which was approved by FERC (RD10‐13‐000). If an entity chooses to
implement an “an equally effective logical protection” in lieu of one of the protection
mechanisms identified in the standard, the entity would be expected to document how the
protection is equally effective. NERC explained in its petition of the PacifiCorp Interpretation of
CIP‐006‐2 that the measures are relevant to access or physical tampering. Therefore, the entity
may choose to discuss how its protection may provide detection of tampering. The entity may
also choose to explain how its protection is equivalent to the other logical options identified in
the standard in terms of the CIA triad (confidentiality, integrity, and availability). The entity
may find value in reviewing their plans prior to implementation with the regional entity, but
there is no obligation to do so.
The intent of the requirement is not to require physical protection of third party components,
consistent with FERC Order 791‐A. The requirement allows flexibility in that the entity has
control of how to design its ESP and also has the ability to extend its ESP outside its PSP via the
logical mechanisms specified in CIP‐006‐6 Requirement 1, Part 1.10 such as encryption (which is
an option specifically identified in FERC Order 791‐A). These mechanisms should provide
sufficient protections to an entity’s BES Cyber Systems while not requiring controls to be
Page 25 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
implemented on third‐party components when entities rely on leased third‐party
communications.
In addition to the cabling, the components in scope of this requirement part are those
components outside of a PSP that could otherwise be considered a BES Cyber Asset or
Protected Cyber Asset except that they do not meet the definition of Cyber Asset because they
are nonprogrammable. Examples of these nonprogrammable components include, but are not
limited to, unmanaged switches, hubs, patch panels, media converters, port savers, and
couplers.
Requirement R2:
The logging of visitors should capture each visit of the individual and does not need to capture
each entry or exit during that visit. This is meant to allow a visitor to temporarily exit the
Physical Security Perimeter to obtain something they left in their vehicle or outside the area
without requiring a new log entry for each and every entry during the visit.
The SDT also determined that a point of contact should be documented who can provide
additional details about the visit if questions arise in the future. The point of contact could be
the escort, but there is no need to document everyone that acted as an escort for the visitor.
Requirement R3:
This includes the testing of locally mounted hardware or devices used in controlling, alerting or
logging access to the Physical Security Perimeter. This includes motion sensors, electronic lock
control mechanisms, and badge readers which are not deemed to be part of the Physical Access
Control System but are required for the protection of the BES Cyber Systems.
Rationale:
During development of this standard, text boxes were embedded within the standard to explain
the rationale for various parts of the standard. Upon BOT approval, the text from the rationale
text boxes was moved to this section.
Rationale for Requirement R1:
Each Responsible Entity shall ensure that physical access to all BES Cyber Systems is restricted
and appropriately managed. Entities may choose for certain Physical Access Control Systems
(PACS) to reside in a Physical Security Perimeter (PSP) controlling access to applicable BES Cyber
Systems. For these PACS, there is no additional obligation to comply with Requirement R1,
Parts 1.1, 1.6 and 1.7 beyond what is already required for the PSP.
Regarding Requirement R1, Part 1.10, when cabling and other nonprogrammable components
of a Control Center’s communication network cannot be secured in a PSP, steps must be taken
to ensure the integrity of the BES Cyber Systems. Exposed communication pathways outside of
a PSP necessitate that physical or logical protections be installed to reduce the likelihood that
man‐in‐the‐middle attacks could compromise the integrity of their connected BES Cyber Assets
or PCAs that are required to reside within PSPs. While it is anticipated that priority
consideration will be given to physically securing the cabling and nonprogrammable
Page 26 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
communications components, the SDT understands that configurations arise when physical
access restrictions are not ideal and Responsible Entities are able to reasonably defend their
physically exposed communications components through specific additional logical protections.
Rationale for Requirement R2:
To control when personnel without authorized unescorted physical access can be in any
Physical Security Perimeters protecting BES Cyber Systems or Electronic Access Control or
Monitoring Systems, as applicable in Table R2.
Rationale for Requirement R3:
To ensure all Physical Access Control Systems and devices continue to function properly.
Page 27 of 27
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-006-6.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-003-9.pdf ---
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
2. Number: CIP‐003‐9
3. Purpose: To specify consistent and sustainable security management controls that
establish responsibility and accountability to protect BES Cyber Systems
against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the
Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
1
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP‐003‐9:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
2
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESPs).
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates: See Implementation Plan for CIP‐003‐9.
3
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager approval at least
once every 15 calendar months for one or more documented cyber security policies
that collectively address the following topics: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. For its high impact and medium impact BES Cyber Systems, if any:
1.1.1. Personnel and training (CIP‐004);
1.1.2. Electronic Security Perimeters (CIP‐005) including Interactive Remote
Access;
1.1.3. Physical security of BES Cyber Systems (CIP‐006);
1.1.4. System security management (CIP‐007);
1.1.5. Incident reporting and response planning (CIP‐008);
1.1.6. Recovery plans for BES Cyber Systems (CIP‐009);
1.1.7. Configuration change management and vulnerability assessments (CIP‐
010);
1.1.8. Information protection (CIP‐011); and
1.1.9. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
1.2. For its assets identified in CIP‐002 containing low impact BES Cyber Systems, if
any:
1.2.1. Cyber security awareness;
1.2.2. Physical security controls;
1.2.3. Electronic access controls;
1.2.4. Cyber Security Incident response;
1.2.5. Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media malicious code risk
mitigation;
1.2.6. Vendor electronic remote access security controls; and
1.2.7. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
M1. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, policy documents; revision
history, records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management
system that indicate review of each cyber security policy at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager for each cyber
security policy.
R2. Each Responsible Entity with at least one asset identified in CIP‐002 containing low
impact BES Cyber Systems shall implement one or more documented cyber security
4
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
plan(s) for its low impact BES Cyber Systems that include the sections in Attachment 1.
[Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
Note: An inventory, list, or discrete identification of low impact BES Cyber Systems or
their BES Cyber Assets is not required. Lists of authorized users are not required.
M2. Evidence shall include each of the documented cyber security plan(s) that collectively
include each of the sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation of the cyber security plan(s). Additional examples of evidence per
section are located in Attachment 2.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall identify a CIP Senior Manager by name and document
any change within 30 calendar days of the change. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated and approved
document from a high level official designating the name of the individual identified as
the CIP Senior Manager.
R4. The Responsible Entity shall implement a documented process to delegate authority,
unless no delegations are used. Where allowed by the CIP Standards, the CIP Senior
Manager may delegate authority for specific actions to a delegate or delegates. These
delegations shall be documented, including the name or title of the delegate, the
specific actions delegated, and the date of the delegation; approved by the CIP Senior
Manager; and updated within 30 days of any change to the delegation. Delegation
changes do not need to be reinstated with a change to the delegator. [Violation Risk
Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M4. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated document,
approved by the CIP Senior Manager, listing individuals (by name or title) who are
delegated the authority to approve or authorize specifically identified items.
5
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure,
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity in
their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance with the NERC
Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention periods identify the period of
time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance.
For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than
the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence
to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of
time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non‐compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non‐compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time
specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records, and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
6
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Operations Medium The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning documented and documented and documented and documented and
implemented one or implemented one or implemented one or implemented one or
more cyber security more cyber security more cyber security more cyber security
policies for its high policies for its high policies for its high policies for its high
impact and medium impact and medium impact and medium impact and medium
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber
Systems, but did not Systems, but did not Systems, but did not Systems, but did not
address one of the nine address two of the nine address three of the address four or more of
topics required by R1. topics required by R1. nine topics required by the nine topics required
(R1.1) (R1.1) R1. (R1.1) by R1. (R1.1)
OR OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
did not complete its did not complete its did not complete its did not have any
review of the one or review of the one or review of the one or documented cyber
more documented cyber more documented cyber more documented cyber security policies for its
security policies for its security policies for its security policies for its high impact and medium
high impact and medium high impact and medium high impact and medium impact BES Cyber
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber Systems as required by
Systems as required by Systems as required by Systems as required by R1. (R1.1)
R1 within 15 calendar R1 within 16 calendar R1 within 17 calendar
OR
months but did months but did months but did
The Responsible Entity
complete this review in complete this review in complete this review in
did not complete its
less than or equal to 16 less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18
review of the one or
calendar months of the calendar months of the calendar months of the
more documented
cyber security policies
8
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
previous review. previous review. previous review. as required by R1
(R1.1) (R1.1) (R1.1) within 18 calendar
months of the previous
OR OR OR
review. (R1)
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
OR
did not complete its did not complete its did not complete its
approval of the one or approval of the one or approval of the one or The Responsible Entity
more documented cyber more documented cyber more documented cyber did not complete its
security policies for its security policies for its security policies for its approval of the one or
high impact and high impact and high impact and more documented cyber
medium impact BES medium impact BES medium impact BES security policies for its
Cyber Systems as Cyber Systems as Cyber Systems as high impact and
required by R1 by the required by R1 by the required by R1 by the medium impact BES
CIP Senior Manager CIP Senior Manager CIP Senior Manager Cyber Systems as
within 15 calendar within 16 calendar within 17 calendar required by R1 by the
months but did months but did months but did CIP Senior Manager
complete this approval complete this approval complete this approval within 18 calendar
in less than or equal to in less than or equal to in less than or equal to months of the previous
16 calendar months of 17 calendar months of 18 calendar months of approval. (R1.1)
the previous approval. the previous approval. the previous approval.
OR
(R1.1) (R1.1) (R1)
The Responsible Entity
OR OR OR
documented one or
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity more cyber security
policies for its assets
documented one or documented one or documented one or
identified in CIP‐002
more cyber security more cyber security more cyber security
containing low impact
policies for its assets policies for its assets policies for its assets
BES Cyber Systems,
identified in CIP‐002 identified in CIP‐002 identified in CIP‐002
but did not address
containing low impact containing low impact containing low impact
9
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
BES Cyber Systems, but BES Cyber Systems, but BES Cyber Systems, but four or more of the
did not address one of did not address two of did not address three of seven topics required
the seven topics the seven topics the seven topics by R1. (R1.2)
required by R1. (R1.2) required by R1. (R1.2) required by R1. (R1.2)
OR
OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not have any
did not complete its did not complete its did not complete its documented cyber
review of the one or review of the one or review of the one or security policies for its
more documented cyber more documented cyber more documented cyber assets identified in CIP‐
security policies for its security policies for its security policies for its 002 containing low
assets identified in CIP‐ assets identified in CIP‐ assets identified in CIP‐ impact BES Cyber
002 containing low 002 containing low 002 containing low Systems as required by
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber R1. (R1.2)
Systems as required by Systems as required by Systems as required by
OR
Requirement R1 within Requirement R1 within R1 within 17 calendar
The Responsible Entity
15 calendar months but 16 calendar months but months but did
did not complete its
did complete this review did complete this review complete this review in
approval of the one or
in less than or equal to in less than or equal to less than or equal to 18
more documented cyber
16 calendar months of 17 calendar months of calendar months of the
security policies for its
the previous review. the previous review. previous review. (R1.2)
assets identified in CIP‐
(R1.2) (R1.2)
OR
002 containing low
OR OR
The Responsible Entity impact BES Cyber
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not complete its Systems as required by
Requirement R1 by the
did not complete its did not complete its approval of the one or
CIP Senior Manager
approval of the one or approval of the one or more documented
within 18 calendar
more documented more documented
months of
10
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
cyber security policies cyber security policies cyber security policies the previous approval.
for its assets identified for its assets identified for its assets identified (R1.2)
in CIP‐002 containing in CIP‐002 containing in CIP‐002 containing
low impact BES Cyber low impact BES Cyber low impact BES Cyber
Systems as required by Systems as required by Systems as required by
Requirement R1 by the Requirement R1 by the Requirement R1 by the
CIP Senior Manager CIP Senior Manager CIP Senior Manager
within 15 calendar within 16 calendar within 17 calendar
months but did months but did months but did
complete this approval complete this approval complete this approval
in less than or equal to in less than or equal to in less than or equal to
16 calendar months of 17 calendar months of 18 calendar months of
the previous approval. the previous approval. the previous approval.
(R1.2) (R1.2) (R1.2)
R2 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning documented its cyber documented its cyber documented the failed to document and
security plan(s) for its security plan(s) for its physical access controls implement one or more
assets containing low assets containing low for its assets containing cyber security plan(s) for
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber low impact BES Cyber its assets containing low
Systems, but failed to Systems, but failed to Systems, but failed to impact BES Cyber
document cyber security reinforce cyber security implement the physical Systems according to
awareness according to practices at least once security controls Requirement R2,
Requirement R2, every 15 calendar according to Attachment 1. (R2)
Attachment 1, Section months according to Requirement R2,
1. (R2) Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section
2. (R2)
OR
11
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity Attachment 1, Section OR
implemented electronic 1. (R2)
The Responsible Entity
access controls but
OR documented its cyber
failed to document its
security plan(s) for
The Responsible Entity
cyber security plan(s) for
electronic access
documented its cyber
electronic access
controls for its assets
security plan(s) for its
controls according to
containing low impact
assets containing low
Requirement R2,
BES Cyber Systems, but
impact BES Cyber
Attachment 1, Section
failed to permit only
Systems, but failed to
3. (R2)
necessary inbound and
document physical
OR outbound electronic
security controls
The Responsible Entity according to access controls
documented its cyber Requirement R2, according to
security plan(s) for its Attachment 1, Section Requirement R2,
assets containing low 2. (R2) Attachment 1, Section
impact BES Cyber 3.1. (R2)
OR
Systems, but failed to OR
The Responsible Entity
document one or more
The Responsible Entity
documented its cyber
Cyber Security Incident
documented one or
security plan(s) for its
response plan(s)
more Cyber Security
assets containing low
according to
Incident response
impact BES Cyber
Requirement R2,
plan(s) within its cyber
Systems, but failed to
Attachment 1, Section
security plan(s) for its
document electronic
4. (R2)
assets containing low
access controls
OR impact BES Cyber
according to
The Responsible Entity Requirement R2, Systems, but failed to
documented one or Attachment 1, Section test each Cyber
3. (R2)
12
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
more Cyber Security OR Security Incident
Incident response response plan(s) at least
The Responsible Entity
plan(s) within its cyber once every 36 calendar
documented its cyber
security plan(s) for its months according to
security plan(s) for
assets containing low Requirement R2,
electronic access
impact BES Cyber Attachment 1, Section
controls but failed to
Systems, but failed to 4. (R2)
implement
update each Cyber
authentication for all OR
Security Incident
Dial‐up Connectivity that The Responsible Entity
response plan(s) within
provides access to low documented the
180 days according to
impact BES Cyber determination of
Requirement R2,
System(s), per Cyber whether an identified
Attachment 1, Section
Asset capability Cyber Security Incident
4. (R2)
according to is a Reportable Cyber
OR Requirement R2, Security Incident, but
The Responsible Entity Attachment 1, Section failed to notify the
documented its plan(s) 3.2 (R2) Electricity Information
for Transient Cyber OR Sharing and Analysis
Assets and Removable Center (E‐ISAC)
The Responsible Entity
Media, but failed to according to
documented one or
manage its Transient Requirement R2,
more incident response
Cyber Asset(s) according Attachment 1, Section
plan(s) within its cyber
to Requirement R2, 4. (R2)
security plan(s) for its
Attachment 1, Section
assets containing low OR
5.1. (R2)
impact BES Cyber
The Responsible Entity
OR Systems, but failed to
documented its
include the process for
13
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity identification, plan(s) for Transient
documented its plan(s) classification, and Cyber Assets and
for Transient Cyber response to Cyber Removable Media, but
Assets, but failed to Security Incidents failed to implement
document the according to mitigation for the
Removable Media Requirement R2, introduction of
section(s) according to Attachment 1, Section malicious code for
Requirement R2, 4. (R2) Transient Cyber Assets
Attachment 1, Section managed by the
OR
5.3. (R2) Responsible Entity
The Responsible Entity
according to
OR
documented its cyber
Requirement R2,
The Responsible Entity security plan(s) for its
Attachment 1, Section
implemented vendor assets containing low
5.1. (R2)
electronic remote access impact BES Cyber
OR
security controls but Systems, but failed to
failed to document its document the The Responsible Entity
cyber security process determination of documented its plan(s)
for vendor electronic whether an identified for Transient Cyber
remote access security Cyber Security Incident Assets and Removable
controls according to is a Reportable Cyber Media, but failed to
Requirement R2, Security Incident and implement mitigation
Attachment 1, Section subsequent notification for the introduction of
6. (R2) to the Electricity malicious code for
Information Sharing and Transient Cyber Assets
Analysis Center (E‐ISAC) managed by a party
according to other than the
Responsible Entity
14
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Requirement R2, according to
Attachment 1, Section Requirement R2,
4. (R2) Attachment 1, Section
5.2. (R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity OR
documented its plan(s) The Responsible Entity
for Transient Cyber documented its plan(s)
Assets and Removable for Transient Cyber
Media, but failed to Assets and Removable
document mitigation for Media, but failed to
the introduction of implement mitigation
malicious code for for the threat of
Transient Cyber Assets detected malicious code
managed by the on the Removable
Responsible Entity Media prior to
according to connecting Removable
Requirement R2, Media to a low impact
Attachment 1, BES Cyber System
Sections 5.1 and 5.3. according to
(R2) Requirement R2,
Attachment 1, Section
OR
5.3. (R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
documented its plan(s) The Responsible Entity
for Transient Cyber failed to document and
Assets and Removable implement its cyber
Media, but failed to security process for
document vendor electronic
15
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
mitigation for the remote access security
introduction of controls according to
malicious code for Requirement R2,
Transient Cyber Assets Attachment 1, Section
managed by a party 6. (R2)
other than the
Responsible Entity
according to
Requirement R2,
Attachment 1, Section
5.2. (R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
documented its plan(s)
for Transient Cyber
Assets and Removable
Media, but failed to
implement the
Removable Media
section(s) according to
Requirement R2,
Attachment 1, Section
5.3. (R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
documented its cyber
security process for
vendor electronic
16
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
remote access security
controls, but failed to
implement vendor
electronic remote access
security controls
according to
Requirement R2,
Attachment 1, Section
6. (R2)
R3 Operations Medium The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has identified by name a has identified by name a has identified by name a has not identified, by
CIP Senior Manager, but CIP Senior Manager, but CIP Senior Manager, but name, a CIP Senior
did not document did not document did not document Manager.
changes to the CIP changes to the CIP changes to the CIP
OR
Senior Manager within Senior Manager within Senior Manager within
The Responsible Entity
30 calendar days but did 40 calendar days but did 50 calendar days but did
has identified by name a
document this change in document this change in document this change in
CIP Senior Manager, but
less than 40 calendar less than 50 calendar less than 60 calendar
did not document
days of the change. (R3) days of the change. (R3) days of the change. (R3)
changes to the CIP
Senior Manager within
60 calendar days of the
change. (R3)
R4 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has identified a delegate has identified a delegate has identified a delegate has used delegated
by name, title, date of by name, title, date of by name, title, date of authority for actions
delegation, and delegation, and delegation, and where allowed by the
CIP Standards, but
17
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
specific actions specific actions specific actions does not have a
delegated, but did not delegated, but did not delegated, but did not process to delegate
document changes to document changes to document changes to actions from the CIP
the delegate within 30 the delegate within 40 the delegate within 50 Senior Manager. (R4)
calendar days but did calendar days but did calendar days but did
OR
document this change in document this change in document this change in
The Responsible Entity
less than 40 calendar less than 50 calendar less than 60 calendar
has identified a delegate
days of the change. (R4) days of the change. (R4) days of the change. (R4)
by name, title, date of
delegation, and specific
actions delegated, but
did not document
changes to the delegate
within 60 calendar days
of the change. (R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
18
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and
to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from ‐2 to ‐3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or system
from service in order to perform testing, in
response to FERC order issued September 30,
2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with other
CIP standards and to
revise format to use
RBS Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two FERC
directives from
19
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version Date Action Change Tracking
Order No. 791
related to identify,
assess, and correct
language and
communication
networks.
6 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the version
adopted by the Board
on 11/13/2014.
Revised version
addresses remaining
directives from Order
No. 791 related to
transient devices and
low impact BES Cyber
Systems.
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐6.
Docket No. RM15‐14‐000
7 2/9/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revised to address
FERC Order No. 822
directives regarding
(1) the definition of
LERC and (2)
transient devices.
7 4/19/18 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐7.
Docket No. RM17‐11‐000
8 5/9/19 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Removed SPS
references.
Revised to address
FERC Order No. 843
regarding mitigating
the risk of malicious
code.
8 7/31/2019 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐8.
Docket No. RD19‐5‐000.
20
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version Date Act Change Tracking
ion
9 11/16/2022 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revisions to address
NERC Board Resolution
and the Supply Chain
Report
9 3/16/2023 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐9.
Docket No. RD23‐3‐000.
21
Attachment 1
Attachment 1
Required Sections for Cyber Security Plan(s) for Assets
Containing Low Impact BES Cyber Systems
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in the cyber security
plan(s) required under Requirement R2.
Responsible Entities with multiple‐impact BES Cyber Systems ratings can utilize policies,
procedures, and processes for their high or medium impact BES Cyber Systems to fulfill the
sections for the development of low impact cyber security plan(s). Each Responsible Entity can
develop a cyber security plan(s) either by individual asset or groups of assets.
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: Each Responsible Entity shall reinforce, at least once
every 15 calendar months, cyber security practices (which may include associated
physical security practices).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Each Responsible Entity shall control physical access,
based on need as determined by the Responsible Entity, to (1) the asset or the
locations of the low impact BES Cyber Systems within the asset, and (2) the Cyber
Asset(s), as specified by the Responsible Entity, that provide electronic access
control(s) implemented for Section 3.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: For each asset containing low impact BES Cyber
System(s) identified pursuant to CIP‐002, the Responsible Entity shall implement
electronic access controls to:
3.1 Permit only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access as
determined by the Responsible Entity for any communications that are:
i. between a low impact BES Cyber System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside
the asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s);
ii. using a routable protocol when entering or leaving the asset containing
the low impact BES Cyber System(s); and
iii. not used for time‐sensitive protection or control functions between
intelligent electronic devices (e.g., communications using protocol IEC TR‐
61850‐90‐5 R‐GOOSE).
3.2 Authenticate all Dial‐up Connectivity, if any, that provides access to low
impact BES Cyber System(s), per Cyber Asset capability.
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more
Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), either by asset or group of assets, which
shall include:
4.1 Identification, classification, and response to Cyber Security Incidents;
22
Attachment 1
4.2 Determination of whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and subsequent notification to the
Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E‐ISAC), unless
prohibited by law;
4.3 Identification of the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security Incident
response by groups or individuals;
4.4 Incident handling for Cyber Security Incidents;
4.5 Testing the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) at least once every 36
calendar months by: (1) responding to an actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; (2) using a drill or tabletop exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; or (3) using an operational exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; and
4.6 Updating the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), if needed, within 180
calendar days after completion of a Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
test or actual Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
Section 5. Transient Cyber Asset and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation: Each
Responsible Entity shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances,
one or more plan(s) to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of the
introduction of malicious code to low impact BES Cyber Systems through the use of
Transient Cyber Assets or Removable Media. The plan(s) shall include:
5.1 For Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by the Responsible Entity, if any, the
use of one or a combination of the following in an ongoing or on‐demand
manner (per Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
5.2 For Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a party other than the Responsible
Entity, if any:
5.2.1 Use one or a combination of the following prior to connecting the
Transient Cyber Asset to a low impact BES Cyber System (per
Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review use of live operating system and software executable only
from read‐only media;
23
Attachment 1
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
5.2.2 For any method used pursuant to 5.2.1, Responsible Entities shall
determine whether any additional mitigation actions are necessary
and implement such actions prior to connecting the Transient Cyber
Asset.
5.3 For Removable Media, the use of each of the following:
5.3.1 Method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media using a
Cyber Asset other than a BES Cyber System; and
5.3.2 Mitigation of the threat of detected malicious code on the Removable
Media prior to connecting Removable Media to a low impact BES
Cyber System.
Section 6. Vendor Electronic Remote Access Security Controls: For assets containing low impact
BES Cyber System(s) identified pursuant to CIP‐002, that allow vendor electronic
remote access, the Responsible Entity shall implement a process to mitigate risks
associated with vendor electronic remote access, where such access has been
established under Section 3.1. These processes shall include:
6.1 One or more method(s) for determining vendor electronic remote access;
6.2 One or more method(s) for disabling vendor electronic remote access; and
6.3 One or more method(s) for detecting known or suspected inbound and
outbound malicious communications for vendor electronic remote access.
24
Attachment 2
Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Cyber Security Plan(s) for Assets Containing
Low Impact BES Cyber Systems
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: An example of evidence for Section 1 may include, but is
not limited to, documentation that the reinforcement of cyber security practices
occurred at least once every 15 calendar months. The evidence could be
documentation through one or more of the following methods:
• Direct communications (for example, e‐mails, memos, or computer‐based
training);
• Indirect communications (for example, posters, intranet, or brochures); or
• Management support and reinforcement (for example, presentations or
meetings).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 2 may include, but are
not limited to:
• Documentation of the selected access control(s) (e.g., card key, locks, perimeter
controls), monitoring controls (e.g., alarm systems, human observation), or other
operational, procedural, or technical physical security controls that control
physical access to both:
a. The asset, if any, or the locations of the low impact BES Cyber Systems within
the asset; and
b. The Cyber Asset(s) specified by the Responsible Entity that provide(s)
electronic access controls implemented for Attachment 1, Section 3.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 3 may include, but are
not limited to:
1. Documentation showing that at each asset or group of assets containing low
impact BES Cyber Systems, routable communication between a low impact BES
Cyber System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset is restricted by electronic
access controls to permit only inbound and outbound electronic access that the
Responsible Entity deems necessary, except where an entity provides rationale
that communication is used for time‐sensitive protection or control functions
between intelligent electronic devices. Examples of such documentation may
include, but are not limited to representative diagrams that illustrate control of
inbound and outbound communication(s) between the low impact BES Cyber
System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s) or lists of implemented electronic access controls (e.g., access
control lists restricting IP addresses, ports, or services; implementing
unidirectional gateways).
25
Attachment 2
2. Documentation of authentication for Dial‐up Connectivity (e.g., dial out only to a
preprogrammed number to deliver data, dial‐back modems, modems that must
be remotely controlled by the control center or control room, or access control
on the BES Cyber System).
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: An example of evidence for Section 4 may include,
but is not limited to, dated documentation, such as policies, procedures, or process
documents of one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) developed
either by asset or group of assets that include the following processes:
1. to identify, classify, and respond to Cyber Security Incidents; to determine
whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident and for notifying the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(E‐ISAC);
2. to identify and document the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security
Incident response by groups or individuals (e.g., initiating, documenting,
monitoring, reporting, etc.);
3. for incident handling of a Cyber Security Incident (e.g., containment, eradication,
or recovery/incident resolution);
4. for testing the plan(s) along with the dated documentation that a test has been
completed at least once every 36 calendar months; and
5. to update, as needed, Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) within 180
calendar days after completion of a test or actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident.
Section 5. Transient Cyber Asset and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation:
1. Examples of evidence for Section 5.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern
updates, application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication,
or other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a Transient
Cyber Asset does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the
introduction of malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the
vendor or Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset does
not have the capability.
2. Examples of evidence for Section 5.2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or
procedures that document a review of the installed antivirus update level;
memoranda, electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from
the party other than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update
process, the use of application whitelisting, use of live operating systems or
system hardening performed by the party other than the Responsible Entity;
evidence from change management systems, electronic mail or contracts that
26
Attachment 2
identifies the Responsible Entity’s acceptance that the practices of the party
other than the Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other
method(s) to mitigate malicious code for Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a
party other than the Responsible Entity. If a Transient Cyber Asset does not have
the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the introduction of malicious code,
evidence may include documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party
other than the Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset
does not have the capability.
Examples of evidence for Attachment 1, Section 5.2.2 may include, but are not
limited to, documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or
contracts that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigation is
necessary and has been implemented prior to connecting the Transient Cyber
Asset managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity.
3. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to detect malicious code such as
results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on‐demand
scanning. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.2 may include, but are not limited
to, documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating the threat of
detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the method(s)
used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and the
mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or documented
confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed to be free of
malicious code.
Section 6. Vendor Electronic Remote Access Security Controls: Examples of evidence
showing the implementation of the process for Section 6 may include, but are
not limited to:
1. For Section 6.1, documentation showing:
• steps to preauthorize access;
• alerts generated by vendor log on;
• session monitoring;
• security information management logging alerts;
• time‐of‐need session initiation;
• session recording;
• system logs; or
• other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
2. For Section 6.2, documentation showing:
• disabling vendor electronic remote access user or system accounts;
27
Attachment 2
• disabling inbound and/or outbound hardware or software ports,
services, or access permissions on applications, firewall, IDS/IPS,
router, switch, VPN, Remote Desktop, remote control, or other
hardware or software used for providing vendor electronic remote
access;
• disabling communications protocols (such as IP) used for systems
which establish and/or maintain vendor electronic remote access;
• Removing physical layer connectivity (e.g., disconnect an Ethernet
cable, power down equipment);
• administrative control documentation listing the methods, steps, or
systems used to disable vendor electronic remote access; or
• other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
3. For Section 6.3, documentation showing implementation of processes or
technologies which have the ability to detect malicious communications such
as:
• Anti‐malware technologies;
• Intrusion Detection System (IDS)/Intrusion Prevention System (IPS);
• Automated or manual log reviews;
• alerting; or
• other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
28
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-003-9.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-013-2.pdf ---
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
2. Number: CIP-013-2
3. Purpose: To mitigate cyber security risks to the reliable operation of the Bulk
Electric System (BES) by implementing security controls for supply chain risk
management of BES Cyber Systems.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
Page 1 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in
this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset
of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-013-2:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESPs).
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
Page 2 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the identification and categorization process
required by CIP-002 or any subsequent version of that Reliability
Standard.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03.
Page 3 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall develop one or more documented supply chain cyber
security risk management plan(s) for high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) and Physical
Access Control Systems (PACS). The plan(s) shall include: [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. One or more process(es) used in planning for the procurement of BES Cyber
Systems and their associated EACMS and PACS to identify and assess cyber
security risk(s) to the Bulk Electric System from vendor products or services
resulting from: (i) procuring and installing vendor equipment and software; and
(ii) transitions from one vendor(s) to another vendor(s).
1.2. One or more process(es) used in procuring BES Cyber Systems, and their
associated EACMS and PACS, that address the following, as applicable:
1.2.1. Notification by the vendor of vendor-identified incidents related to the
products or services provided to the Responsible Entity that pose cyber
security risk to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.2. Coordination of responses to vendor-identified incidents related to the
products or services provided to the Responsible Entity that pose cyber
security risk to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.3. Notification by vendors when remote or onsite access should no longer
be granted to vendor representatives;
1.2.4. Disclosure by vendors of known vulnerabilities related to the products or
services provided to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.5. Verification of software integrity and authenticity of all software and
patches provided by the vendor for use in the BES Cyber System and their
associated EACMS and PACS; and
1.2.6. Coordination of controls for vendor-initiated remote access.
M1. Evidence shall include one or more documented supply chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) as specified in the Requirement.
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement its supply chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) specified in Requirement R1. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
Note: Implementation of the plan does not require the Responsible Entity to
renegotiate or abrogate existing contracts (including amendments to master
agreements and purchase orders). Additionally, the following issues are beyond the
scope of Requirement R2: (1) the actual terms and conditions of a procurement
contract; and (2) vendor performance and adherence to a contract.
Page 4 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
M2. Evidence shall include documentation to demonstrate implementation of the supply
chain cyber security risk management plan(s), which could include, but is not limited
to, correspondence, policy documents, or working documents that demonstrate use
of the supply chain cyber security risk management plan.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager or delegate
approval of its supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s) specified in
Requirement R1 at least once every 15 calendar months. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. Evidence shall include the dated supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s)
approved by the CIP Senior Manager or delegate(s) and additional evidence to
demonstrate review of the supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s).
Evidence may include, but is not limited to, policy documents, revision history,
records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management system that
indicate review of supply chain risk management plan(s) at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager or delegate.
Page 5 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity,
or any entity as otherwise designated by an Applicable Governmental Authority,
in their respective roles of monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with
mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in their respective
jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period of time an entity
is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to
show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and
Enforcement Program” refers to the identification of the processes that will be
used to evaluate data or information for the purpose of assessing performance
or outcomes with the associated Reliability Standard.
Page 6 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
developed one or more developed one or more developed one or more developed one or more
documented supply chain documented supply chain documented supply chain documented supply chain
cyber security risk cyber security risk cyber security risk cyber security risk
management plan(s) which management plan(s) which management plan(s), but management plan(s), but
include the use of include the use of the plan(s) did not include the plan(s) did not include
process(es) in planning for process(es) in planning for the use of process(es) in the use of process(es) in
procurement of BES Cyber procurement of BES Cyber planning for procurement of planning for procurement of
Systems, and their Systems, and their BES Cyber Systems, and BES Cyber Systems, and
associated EACMS and associated EACMS and their associated EACMS and their associated EACMS and
PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess
cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the
BES as specified in Part 1.1, BES as specified in Part 1.1, BES as specified in Part 1.1, BES as specified in Part 1.1,
and include the use of and include the use of or the plan(s) did not and the plan(s) did not
process(es) for procuring process(es) for procuring include the use of include the use of
BES Cyber Systems and their BES Cyber Systems and their process(es) for procuring process(es) for procuring
associated EACMS and associated EACMS and BES Cyber Systems and their BES Cyber Systems and their
PACS, as specified in Part PACS, as specified in Part associated EACMS and associated EACMS and
1.2, but the plans do not 1.2, but the plans do not PACS, as specified in Part PACS, as specified in Part
include one of the parts in include two or more of the 1.2. 1.2.
Part 1.2.1 through Part parts in Part 1.2.1 through
OR
1.2.6. Part 1.2.6.
The Responsible Entity did
not develop one or more
documented supply chain
cyber security risk
Page 7 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
management plan(s) as
specified in the
Requirement.
R2. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
implemented its supply implemented its supply implemented its supply implemented its supply
chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) management plan(s) management plan(s), but management plan(s), but
including the use of including the use of did not implement the use did not implement the use
process(es) in planning for process(es) in planning for of process(es) in planning of process(es) in planning
procurement of BES Cyber procurement of BES Cyber for procurement of BES for procurement of BES
Systems, and their Systems, and their Cyber Systems, and their Cyber Systems, and their
associated EACMS and associated EACMS and associated EACMS and associated EACMS and
PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess
cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the
BES as specified in BES as specified in BES as specified in BES as specified in
Requirement R1 Part 1.1, Requirement R1 Part 1.1, Requirement R1 Part 1.1, or Requirement R1 Part 1.1,
and including the use of and including the use of did not implement the use and did not implement the
process(es) for procuring process(es) for procuring of process(es) for procuring use of process(es) for
BES Cyber Systems and their BES Cyber Systems and their BES Cyber Systems and their procuring BES Cyber
associated EACMS and associated EACMS and associated EACMS and Systems and their
PACS, as specified in PACS, as specified in PACS, as specified in associated EACMS and
Requirement R1 Part 1.2, Requirement R1 Part 1.2, Requirement R1 Part 1.2. PACS, as specified in
but did not implement one but did not implement two Requirement R1 Part 1.2;
of the parts in Requirement or more of the parts in
OR
R1 Part 1.2.1 through Part Requirement R1 Part 1.2.1
The Responsible Entity did
1.2.6. through Part 1.2.6.
not implement its supply
Page 8 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
chain cyber security risk
management plan(s)
specified in the
requirement.
R3. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did
reviewed and obtained CIP reviewed and obtained CIP reviewed and obtained CIP not review and obtain CIP
Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate
approval of its supply chain approval of its supply chain approval of its supply chain approval of its supply chain
cyber security risk cyber security risk cyber security risk cyber security risk
management plan(s) but did management plan(s) but did management plan(s) but did management plan(s) within
so more than 15 calendar so more than 16 calendar so more than 17 calendar 18 calendar months of the
months but less than or months but less than or months but less than or previous review as specified
equal to 16 calendar months equal to 17 calendar months equal to 18 calendar months in the Requirement.
since the previous review as since the previous review as since the previous review as
specified in the specified in the specified in the
Requirement. Requirement. Requirement.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03
• CIP-013-2 Technical Rationale
Page 9 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 08/10/17 Approved by the NERC Respond to FERC Order No.
Board of Trustees. 829.
1 10/18/18 FERC Order approving
CIP-013-1. Docket No.
RM17-13-000.
2 11/05/2020 Approved by the NERC Modified to address directive
Board of Trustees. in FERC Order No. 850.
2 3/18/2021 FERC Order approving
CIP-013-2.Docket No.
RD21-2-000.
Page 10 of 10
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-013-2.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-011-4.pdf ---
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Information Protection
2. Number: CIP-011-4
3. Purpose: To prevent unauthorized access to BES Cyber System Information (BCSI) by
specifying information protection requirements in support of protecting BES Cyber Systems
(BCS) against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric
System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional entity
or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load
shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity, without
human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including
the first interconnection point of the starting station service of the
next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
Page 1 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above are
those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this standard
where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of Facilities,
systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity, without
human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements in a
NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including
the first interconnection point of the starting station service of the
next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-011-4:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security Perimeters
(ESP).
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and data
communication links, between the Cyber Systems providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or more
geographic locations.
Page 2 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant
to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not
included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber Systems
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the CIP-002
identification and categorization processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to define the
scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards” Implementation Plan.
Page 3 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented information protection program(s) for BCSI pertaining to
Applicable Systems identified in CIP-011-4 Table R1 – Information Protection Program that collectively includes each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-011-4 Table R1 – Information Protection Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M1. Evidence for the information protection program must include the applicable requirement parts in CIP-011-4 Table R1 –
Information Protection Program and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures
column of the table.
CIP-011-4 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Method(s) to identify BCSI. Examples of evidence may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
1. Electronic Access Control and
Monitoring Systems (EACMS); and • Documented method(s) to identify
BCSI from the entity’s information
2. Physical Access Control Systems
protection program; or
(PACS)
• Indications on information (e.g., labels
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
or classification) that identify BCSI as
1. EACMS; and
designated in the entity’s information
protection program; or
2. PACS
• Training materials that provide
Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI)
personnel with sufficient knowledge
supporting an Applicable System in this
to identify BCSI; or
Part
• Storage locations identified for
housing BCSI in the entity’s
information protection program.
1.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Method(s) to protect and securely Examples of evidence for on-premise BCSI
handle BCSI to mitigate risks of may include, but are not limited to, the
1. EACMS; and
compromising confidentiality. following:
2. PACS
• Procedures for protecting and
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
securely handling, which include
Page 4 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
CIP-011-4 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
topics such as storage, security
1. EACMS; and
during transit, and use of BCSI; or
2. PACS • Records indicating that BCSI is
handled in a manner consistent
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
with the entity’s documented
this Part
procedure(s).
Examples of evidence for off-premise BCSI
may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
• Implementation of electronic
technical method(s) to protect
electronic BCSI (e.g., data
masking, encryption, hashing,
tokenization, cipher, electronic
key management); or
• Implementation of physical
technical method(s) to protect
physical BCSI (e.g., physical lock
and key management, physical
badge management, biometrics,
alarm system); or
• Implementation of administrative
method(s) to protect BCSI (e.g.,
vendor service risk assessments,
business agreements).
Page 5 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-011-4 Table R2 –Reuse and Disposal. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations
Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-011-4 Table R2 –Reuse and Disposal and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-011-4 Table R2 –Reuse and Disposal
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
Methods to prevent the unauthorized
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Examples of evidence may include, but are
retrieval of BCSI from Applicable Systems
not limited to, the following:
1. EACMS; containing BCSI, prior to their disposal or
reuse (except for reuse within other • Records tracking sanitization actions
2. PACS; and
systems identified in the Applicable taken to prevent unauthorized retrieval
3. PCA Systems column). of BCSI such as clearing, purging, or
destroying; or
Medium impact BCS and their
associated: • Records tracking actions such as
encrypting, retaining in the Physical
1. EACMS;
Security Perimeter (PSP) or other
2. PACS; and
methods used to prevent unauthorized
3. PCA retrieval of BCSI.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part
Page 6 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
B. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring and/or
enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in
their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period
of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is
shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide
other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last
audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of
time as part of an investigation:
• The applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard
for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the
time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
Page 7 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
Violation Severity Levels
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-011-4)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 N/A N/A The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity neither
implement one or more BCSI documented nor implemented one or
protection program(s). more BCSI protection program(s).
(Requirement R1) (Requirement R1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement at least one method to
identify BCSI. (Part 1.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement at least one method to
protect and securely handle BCSI.
(Part 1.2)
R2 N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity neither
did not include include disposal processes to documented nor implemented any
processes for reuse to prevent the unauthorized retrieval processes for applicable requirement
prevent the of BCSI from an Applicable System. parts in CIP-011-4 Table R2 –Reuse and
unauthorized retrieval (Part 2.1) Disposal. (Requirement R2)
of BCSI from an
Applicable System.
(Part 2.1)
Page 8 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
C. Regional Variances
None.
D. Interpretations
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-011-4 Technical Rationale
Page 9 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Developed to define the
Trustees. information protection
requirements in coordination
with other CIP standards and to
address the balance of the FERC
directives in its Order 706.
1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
011-1. (Order becomes effective on
2/3/14.)
2 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Addressed two FERC directives
Trustees. from Order No. 791 related to
identify, assess, and correct
language and communication
networks.
2 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Replaces the version adopted by
Trustees. the Board on 11/13/2014.
Revised version addresses
remaining directives from Order
No. 791 related to transient
devices and low impact BES
Cyber Systems.
2 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
011-2. Docket No. RM15-14-000
3 8/12/21 Adopted by the NERC Board of Revised to enhance BES
Trustees reliability for entities to manage
their BCSI.
3 12/7/21 FERC Order issued approving CIP- “A Responsible Entity may elect
011-3 Docket No. RD21-6-000 to comply with the requirements
in CIP-004-7 and CIP-011-3
following their approval by the
applicable governmental
authority, but prior to their
Effective Date. In such a case,
the Responsible Entity shall
notify the applicable Regional
Entities of the date of
compliance with the CIP-004-7
and CIP-011-3 Reliability
Standards. Responsible Entities
must comply with CIP-004-6 and
CIP-011-2 until that date.”
Virtualization Modifications
4 5/9/2024 Approved by the NERC Board of
under Project 2016-02
Trustees.
Page 10 of 10
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-011-4.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-006-7.pdf ---
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
2. Number: CIP-006-7
3. Purpose: To manage physical access to Bulk Electric System (BES) Cyber Systems by
specifying a physical security plan in support of protecting BES Cyber
Systems (BCS) against compromise that could lead to misoperation or
instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein,
the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of
the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting
station service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
Page 1 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible
Entity in 4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable,
these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting
station service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-006-7:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic
Security Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between Cyber Systems, providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or
more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to
define the scope of systems to which a specific Requirement Part applies.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards
Implementation Plan”.
Page 3 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented physical security plan(s) that collectively include all of
the applicable requirement parts in CIP-006-7 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long Term Planning and Same Day Operations].
M1. Evidence must include each of the documented physical security plans that collectively include all of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-006-7 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation
of the plan or plans as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-006-7 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 Medium impact BCS without External Define operational or procedural controls Examples of evidence may include, but are
Routable Connectivity (ERC) to restrict physical access. not limited to, documentation that
operational or procedural controls exist.
Physical Access Control Systems (PACS)
associated with:
• High impact BCS, or
• Medium impact BCS with ERC
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
1.2 Medium impact BCS with ERC and their Utilize at least one physical access control Examples of evidence may include, but are
associated: to allow unescorted physical access into not limited to, language in the physical
each applicable PSP to only those security plan that describes each PSP and
1. Electronic Access Control and
individuals who have authorized how unescorted physical access is
Monitoring Systems (EACMS); and
unescorted physical access. controlled by one or more different
2. Protected Cyber Asset (PCA)
methods and proof that unescorted
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this physical access is restricted to only
Part authorized individuals, such as a list of
authorized individuals accompanied by
access logs.
Page 4 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP-006-7 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Utilize two or more different physical Examples of evidence may include, but are
access controls (this does not require two not limited to, language in the physical
1. EACMS; and
completely independent PACS) to security plan that describes each PSP and
2. PCA
collectively allow unescorted physical how unescorted physical access is
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
access into PSPs to only those individuals controlled by two or more different
Part
who have authorized unescorted physical methods and proof that unescorted
access, per system capability. physical access is restricted to only
authorized individuals, such as a list of
authorized individuals accompanied by
access logs.
1.4 High impact BCS and their associated: Monitor for unauthorized access through a Examples of evidence may include, but are
physical access point into a PSP. not limited to, documentation of controls
1. EACMS; and
that monitor for unauthorized access
2. PCA
through a physical access point into a PSP.
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
Page 5 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP-006-7 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.5 High impact BCS and their associated: Issue an alarm or alert in response to Examples of evidence may include, but are
detected unauthorized access through a not limited to, language in the physical
1. EACMS; and
physical access point into a PSP to the security plan that describes the issuance of
2. PCA
personnel identified in the Cyber Security an alarm or alert in response to
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
Incident response plan within 15 minutes unauthorized access through a physical
associated:
of detection. access control into a PSP and additional
1. EACMS; and evidence that the alarm or alert was
2. PCA issued and communicated as identified in
the Cyber Security Incident Response Plan,
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
such as manual or electronic alarm or alert
Part
logs, cell phone or pager logs, or other
evidence that documents that the alarm or
alert was generated and communicated.
1.6 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) Monitor each PACS for unauthorized An example of evidence may include, but
associated with: physical access to a PACS. is not limited to, documentation of
controls that monitor for unauthorized
• High impact BCS, or
physical access to a PACS.
• Medium impact BCS with ERC
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
1.7 PACS associated with: Issue an alarm or alert in response to Examples of evidence may include, but are
detected unauthorized physical access to a not limited to, language in the physical
• High impact BCS, or
PACS to the personnel identified in the security plan that describes the issuance of
• Medium impact BCS with ERC
Cyber Security Incident response plan an alarm or alert in response to
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
within 15 minutes of the detection. unauthorized physical access to PACS and
Part
additional evidence that the alarm or
alerts was issued and communicated as
identified in the Cyber Security Incident
Response Plan, such as alarm or alert logs,
cell phone or pager logs, or other evidence
that the alarm or alert was generated and
communicated.
Page 6 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP-006-7 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.8 High impact BCS and their associated: Log (through automated means or by Examples of evidence may include, but
personnel who control entry) entry of are not limited to, language in the
1. EACMS; and
each individual with authorized physical security plan that describes
2. PCA
unescorted physical access into each logging and recording of physical entry
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
PSP, with information to identify the into each PSP and additional evidence
associated:
individual and date and time of entry. to demonstrate that this logging has
1. EACMS; and been implemented, such as logs of
2. PCA physical access into each PSP that
show the individual and the date and
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
time of entry into each PSP.
Part
1.9 High impact BCS and their associated: Retain physical access logs of entry of Examples of evidence may include, but
individuals with authorized unescorted are not limited to, dated
1. EACMS; and
physical access into each PSP for at documentation such as logs of physical
2. PCA
least 90 calendar days. access into each PSP that show the
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
date and time of entry into each PSP.
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
Page 7 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement, except during CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or more documented visitor
control program(s) that include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-006-7 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program.
[Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Same Day Operations.]
M2. Evidence must include one or more documented visitor control programs that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-006-7 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-006-7 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Require continuous escorted access of Examples of evidence may include, but are
visitors (individuals who are provided not limited to, language in a visitor control
1. EACMS; and
access but are not authorized for program that requires continuous escorted
2. PCA
unescorted physical access) within each access of visitors within each PSP and
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
PSP. additional evidence to demonstrate that
associated:
the process was implemented, such as
1. EACMS; and visitor logs.
2. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part
2.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Require manual or automated logging of Examples of evidence may include, but are
visitor entry into and exit from each PSP not limited to, language in a visitor control
1. EACMS; and
that includes date and time of the initial program that requires continuous escorted
2. PCA
entry and last exit, the visitor’s name, and access of visitors within each PSP and
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
the name of an individual point of contact additional evidence to demonstrate that
associated:
responsible for the visitor. the process was implemented, such as
1. EACMS; and dated visitor logs that include the required
2. PCA information.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part
Page 8 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP-006-7 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Retain visitor logs for at least 90 calendar An example of evidence may include, but is
days. not limited to, documentation showing logs
1. EACMS; and
have been retained for at least 90 calendar
2. PCA
days.
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part
Page 9 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented Physical Access Control System maintenance and testing
program(s) that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-006-7 Table R3 – Maintenance and Testing
Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M3. Evidence must include each of the documented Physical Access Control System maintenance and testing programs that
collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-006-7 Table R3 – Maintenance and Testing Program and
additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-006-7 Table R3 – Physical Access Control System Maintenance and Testing Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirement Measures
3.1 PACS associated with: Maintenance and testing of each PACS and Examples of evidence may include, but are
locally mounted hardware or devices at not limited to, a maintenance and testing
• High impact BCS, or
each PSP at least once every 24 calendar program that provides for testing each
• Medium impact BCS with ERC
months to ensure they function properly. PACS and locally mounted hardware or
Locally mounted hardware or devices at
devices associated with each applicable
the PSP associated with:
each PSP at least once every 24 calendar
• High impact BCS, or months and additional evidence to
demonstrate that this testing was done,
• Medium impact BCS with ERC
such as dated maintenance records, or
other documentation showing testing and
maintenance has been performed on each
applicable device or system at least once
every 24 calendar months.
Page 10 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure,
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity in
their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance with the NERC
Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention periods identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide
other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the
last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 11 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-006-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 N/A N/A N/A The Responsible Entity did not
document or implement
physical security plans.
(Requirement R1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
document or implement
operational or procedural
controls to restrict physical
access. (Part 1.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
documented and implemented
physical access controls, but at
least one control does not
exist to restrict access to
Applicable Systems. (Part 1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
documented and implemented
physical access controls, but at
least two different controls do
not exist to restrict access to
Applicable Systems. (Part 1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process to monitor
Page 12 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-006-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
for unauthorized access
through a physical access point
into a PSP. (Part 1.4)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process to alert for
detected unauthorized access
through a physical access point
into a PSP or to communicate
such alerts within 15 minutes
to identified personnel. (Part
1.5)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process to monitor
each PACS for unauthorized
physical access to a PACS. (Part
1.6)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process to alert for
unauthorized physical access
to PACS or to communicate
such alerts within 15 minutes
to identified personnel. (Part
1.7)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process to log
Page 13 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-006-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
authorized physical entry into
each PSP with sufficient
information to identify the
individual and date and time of
entry. (Part 1.8)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process to retain
physical access logs for 90
calendar days. (Part 1.9)
R2 N/A N/A N/A The Responsible Entity has
failed to include or implement
a visitor control program that
requires continuous escorted
access of visitors within any
Physical Security Perimeter.
(Part 2.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
failed to include or implement
a visitor control program that
requires logging of the initial
entry and last exit dates and
times of the visitor, the
visitor’s name, and the point of
contact. (Part 2.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity failed
to include or implement a
Page 14 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-006-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
visitor control program to
retain visitor logs for at least
90 days. (Part 2.3)
R3 The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity did not
documented and implemented documented and implemented documented and implemented document or implement a
a maintenance and testing a maintenance and testing a maintenance and testing maintenance and testing
program for Physical Access program for Physical Access program for PACS and locally program for PACS and locally
Control Systems and locally Control Systems and locally mounted hardware or devices mounted hardware or devices
mounted hardware or devices mounted hardware or devices at the Physical Security at the PSP. (Part 3.1)
at the Physical Security at the PSP, but did not Perimeter, but did not
OR
Perimeter, but did not complete required testing complete required testing
The Responsible Entity has
complete required testing within 25 calendar months but within 26 calendar months but
documented and implemented
within 24 calendar months but did complete required testing did complete required testing
a maintenance and testing
did complete required testing within 26 calendar months. within 27 calendar months.
program for PACS and locally
within 25 calendar months. (Part 3.1) (Part 3.1)
mounted hardware or devices
(Part 3.1)
at the PSP, but did not
complete required testing
within 27 calendar months.
(Part 3.1)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-006-7 Technical Rationale
Page 15 of 16
CIP-006-7 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and
to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or system
from service in order to perform testing, in
response to FERC order issued September 30,
2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with other
CIP standards and to
revise format to use
RBS Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-006-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed FERC
directives from Order
No. 791.
6 1/21/16 FERC order issued approving CIP-006-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Virtualization
Modifications by
Project 2016-02
Page 16 of 16
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-006-7.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-014-3.pdf ---
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
A. Introduction
1. Title: Physical Security
2. Number: CIP-014-3
3. Purpose: To identify and protect Transmission stations and Transmission
substations, and their associated primary control centers, that if
rendered inoperable or damaged as a result of a physical attack could
result in instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an
Interconnection.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities:
4.1.1 Transmission Owner that owns a Transmission station or Transmission
substation that meets any of the following criteria:
4.1.1.1 Transmission Facilities operated at 500 kV or higher. For the purpose
of this criterion, the collector bus for a generation plant is not
considered a Transmission Facility, but is part of the generation
interconnection Facility.
4.1.1.2 Transmission Facilities that are operating between 200 kV and 499 kV
at a single station or substation, where the station or substation is
connected at 200 kV or higher voltages to three or more other
Transmission stations or substations and has an "aggregate weighted
value" exceeding 3000 according to the table below. The "aggregate
weighted value" for a single station or substation is determined by
summing the "weight value per line" shown in the table below for
each incoming and each outgoing BES Transmission Line that is
connected to another Transmission station or substation. For the
purpose of this criterion, the collector bus for a generation plant is
not considered a Transmission Facility, but is part of the generation
interconnection Facility.
Voltage Value of a Line Weight Value per Line
less than 200 kV (not (not applicable)
applicable)
200 kV to 299 kV 700
300 kV to 499 kV 1300
500 kV and above 0
4.1.1.3 Transmission Facilities at a single station or substation location that
are identified by its Reliability Coordinator, Planning Coordinator, or
Page 1 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
Transmission Planner as critical to the derivation of Interconnection
Reliability Operating Limits (IROLs) and their associated
contingencies.
4.1.1.4 Transmission Facilities identified as essential to meeting Nuclear Plant
Interface Requirements.
4.1.2 Transmission Operator.
Exemption: Facilities in a “protected area,” as defined in 10 C.F.R. § 73.2, within
the scope of a security plan approved or accepted by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission are not subject to this Standard; or, Facilities within the scope of a
security plan approved or accepted by the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission
are not subject to this Standard.
5. Effective Dates:
See Implementation Plan for CIP-014-2.
6. Background:
This Reliability Standard addresses the directives from the FERC order issued March 7,
2014, Reliability Standards for Physical Security Measures, 146 FERC ¶ 61,166 (2014),
which required NERC to develop a physical security reliability standard(s) to identify
and protect facilities that if rendered inoperable or damaged could result in
instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection.
Page 2 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Transmission Owner shall perform an initial risk assessment and subsequent risk
assessments of its Transmission stations and Transmission substations (existing and
planned to be in service within 24 months) that meet the criteria specified in
Applicability Section 4.1.1. The initial and subsequent risk assessments shall consist of
a transmission analysis or transmission analyses designed to identify the Transmission
station(s) and Transmission substation(s) that if rendered inoperable or damaged
could result in instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an
Interconnection. [VRF: High; Time-Horizon: Long-term Planning]
1.1. Subsequent risk assessments shall be performed:
• At least once every 30 calendar months for a Transmission Owner that has
identified in its previous risk assessment (as verified according to
Requirement R2) one or more Transmission stations or Transmission
substations that if rendered inoperable or damaged could result in instability,
uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection; or
• At least once every 60 calendar months for a Transmission Owner that has not
identified in its previous risk assessment (as verified according to
Requirement R2) any Transmission stations or Transmission substations that if
rendered inoperable or damaged could result in instability, uncontrolled
separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection.
1.2. The Transmission Owner shall identify the primary control center that
operationally controls each Transmission station or Transmission substation
identified in the Requirement R1 risk assessment.
M1. Examples of acceptable evidence may include, but are not limited to, dated written or
electronic documentation of the risk assessment of its Transmission stations and
Transmission substations (existing and planned to be in service within 24 months) that
meet the criteria in Applicability Section 4.1.1 as specified in Requirement R1.
Additionally, examples of acceptable evidence may include, but are not limited to,
dated written or electronic documentation of the identification of the primary control
center that operationally controls each Transmission station or Transmission
substation identified in the Requirement R1 risk assessment as specified in
Requirement R1, Part 1.2.
R2. Each Transmission Owner shall have an unaffiliated third party verify the risk
assessment performed under Requirement R1. The verification may occur concurrent
with or after the risk assessment performed under Requirement R1. [VRF: Medium;
Time-Horizon: Long-term Planning]
2.1. Each Transmission Owner shall select an unaffiliated verifying entity that is
either:
Page 3 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
• A registered Planning Coordinator, Transmission Planner, or Reliability
Coordinator; or
• An entity that has transmission planning or analysis experience.
2.2. The unaffiliated third party verification shall verify the Transmission Owner’s risk
assessment performed under Requirement R1, which may include
recommendations for the addition or deletion of a Transmission station(s) or
Transmission substation(s). The Transmission Owner shall ensure the
verification is completed within 90 calendar days following the completion of the
Requirement R1 risk assessment.
2.3. If the unaffiliated verifying entity recommends that the Transmission Owner add
a Transmission station(s) or Transmission substation(s) to, or remove a
Transmission station(s) or Transmission substation(s) from, its identification
under Requirement R1, the Transmission Owner shall either, within 60 calendar
days of completion of the verification, for each recommended addition or
removal of a Transmission station or Transmission substation:
• Modify its identification under Requirement R1 consistent with the
recommendation; or
• Document the technical basis for not modifying the identification in
accordance with the recommendation.
2.4. Each Transmission Owner shall implement procedures, such as the use of non-
disclosure agreements, for protecting sensitive or confidential information made
available to the unaffiliated third party verifier and to protect or exempt
sensitive or confidential information developed pursuant to this Reliability
Standard from public disclosure.
M2. Examples of acceptable evidence may include, but are not limited to, dated written or
electronic documentation that the Transmission Owner completed an unaffiliated
third party verification of the Requirement R1 risk assessment and satisfied all of the
applicable provisions of Requirement R2, including, if applicable, documenting the
technical basis for not modifying the Requirement R1 identification as specified under
Part 2.3. Additionally, examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to,
written or electronic documentation of procedures to protect information under Part
2.4.
R3. For a primary control center(s) identified by the Transmission Owner according to
Requirement R1, Part 1.2 that a) operationally controls an identified Transmission
station or Transmission substation verified according to Requirement R2, and b) is not
under the operational control of the Transmission Owner: the Transmission Owner
shall, within seven calendar days following completion of Requirement R2, notify the
Transmission Operator that has operational control of the primary control center of
Page 4 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
such identification and the date of completion of Requirement R2. [VRF: Lower; Time-
Horizon: Long-term Planning]
3.1. If a Transmission station or Transmission substation previously identified under
Requirement R1 and verified according to Requirement R2 is removed from the
identification during a subsequent risk assessment performed according to
Requirement R1 or a verification according to Requirement R2, then the
Transmission Owner shall, within seven calendar days following the verification
or the subsequent risk assessment, notify the Transmission Operator that has
operational control of the primary control center of the removal.
M3. Examples of acceptable evidence may include, but are not limited to, dated written or
electronic notifications or communications that the Transmission Owner notified each
Transmission Operator, as applicable, according to Requirement R3.
R4. Each Transmission Owner that identified a Transmission station, Transmission
substation, or a primary control center in Requirement R1 and verified according to
Requirement R2, and each Transmission Operator notified by a Transmission Owner
according to Requirement R3, shall conduct an evaluation of the potential threats and
vulnerabilities of a physical attack to each of their respective Transmission station(s),
Transmission substation(s), and primary control center(s) identified in Requirement
R1 and verified according to Requirement R2. The evaluation shall consider the
following: [VRF: Medium; Time-Horizon: Operations Planning, Long-term Planning]
4.1. Unique characteristics of the identified and verified Transmission station(s),
Transmission substation(s), and primary control center(s);
4.2. Prior history of attack on similar facilities taking into account the frequency,
geographic proximity, and severity of past physical security related events; and
4.3. Intelligence or threat warnings received from sources such as law enforcement,
the Electric Reliability Organization (ERO), the Electricity Sector Information
Sharing and Analysis Center (ES-ISAC), U.S. federal and/or Canadian
governmental agencies, or their successors.
M4. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, dated written or electronic
documentation that the Transmission Owner or Transmission Operator conducted an
evaluation of the potential threats and vulnerabilities of a physical attack to their
respective Transmission station(s), Transmission substation(s) and primary control
center(s) as specified in Requirement R4.
R5. Each Transmission Owner that identified a Transmission station, Transmission
substation, or primary control center in Requirement R1 and verified according to
Requirement R2, and each Transmission Operator notified by a Transmission Owner
according to Requirement R3, shall develop and implement a documented physical
security plan(s) that covers their respective Transmission station(s), Transmission
substation(s), and primary control center(s). The physical security plan(s) shall be
Page 5 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
developed within 120 calendar days following the completion of Requirement R2 and
executed according to the timeline specified in the physical security plan(s). The
physical security plan(s) shall include the following attributes: [VRF: High; Time-
Horizon: Long-term Planning]
5.1. Resiliency or security measures designed collectively to deter, detect, delay,
assess, communicate, and respond to potential physical threats and
vulnerabilities identified during the evaluation conducted in Requirement R4.
5.2. Law enforcement contact and coordination information.
5.3. A timeline for executing the physical security enhancements and modifications
specified in the physical security plan.
5.4. Provisions to evaluate evolving physical threats, and their corresponding security
measures, to the Transmission station(s), Transmission substation(s), or primary
control center(s).
M5. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, dated written or electronic
documentation of its physical security plan(s) that covers their respective identified
and verified Transmission station(s), Transmission substation(s), and primary control
center(s) as specified in Requirement R5, and additional evidence demonstrating
execution of the physical security plan according to the timeline specified in the
physical security plan.
R6. Each Transmission Owner that identified a Transmission station, Transmission
substation, or primary control center in Requirement R1 and verified according to
Requirement R2, and each Transmission Operator notified by a Transmission Owner
according to Requirement R3, shall have an unaffiliated third party review the
evaluation performed under Requirement R4 and the security plan(s) developed
under Requirement R5. The review may occur concurrently with or after completion
of the evaluation performed under Requirement R4 and the security plan
development under Requirement R5. [VRF: Medium; Time-Horizon: Long-term
Planning]
6.1. Each Transmission Owner and Transmission Operator shall select an unaffiliated
third party reviewer from the following:
• An entity or organization with electric industry physical security experience
and whose review staff has at least one member who holds either a Certified
Protection Professional (CPP) or Physical Security Professional (PSP)
certification.
• An entity or organization approved by the ERO.
• A governmental agency with physical security expertise.
Page 6 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
• An entity or organization with demonstrated law enforcement, government,
or military physical security expertise.
6.2. The Transmission Owner or Transmission Operator, respectively, shall ensure
that the unaffiliated third party review is completed within 90 calendar days of
completing the security plan(s) developed in Requirement R5. The unaffiliated
third party review may, but is not required to, include recommended changes to
the evaluation performed under Requirement R4 or the security plan(s)
developed under Requirement R5.
6.3. If the unaffiliated third party reviewer recommends changes to the evaluation
performed under Requirement R4 or security plan(s) developed under
Requirement R5, the Transmission Owner or Transmission Operator shall, within
60 calendar days of the completion of the unaffiliated third party review, for
each recommendation:
• Modify its evaluation or security plan(s) consistent with the recommendation;
or
• Document the reason(s) for not modifying the evaluation or security plan(s)
consistent with the recommendation.
6.4. Each Transmission Owner and Transmission Operator shall implement
procedures, such as the use of non-disclosure agreements, for protecting
sensitive or confidential information made available to the unaffiliated third
party reviewer and to protect or exempt sensitive or confidential information
developed pursuant to this Reliability Standard from public disclosure.
M6. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, written or electronic
documentation that the Transmission Owner or Transmission Operator had an
unaffiliated third party review the evaluation performed under Requirement R4 and
the security plan(s) developed under Requirement R5 as specified in Requirement R6
including, if applicable, documenting the reasons for not modifying the evaluation or
security plan(s) in accordance with a recommendation under Part 6.3. Additionally,
examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, written or electronic
documentation of procedures to protect information under Part 6.4.
Page 7 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means NERC or the Regional
Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to
demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence during an on-site visit to show that it was
compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Transmission Owner and Transmission Operator shall keep data or evidence to show compliance, as identified
below, unless directed by its Compliance Enforcement Authority (CEA) to retain specific evidence for a longer period
of time as part of an investigation.
The responsible entities shall retain documentation as evidence for three years.
If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the non-compliance until
mitigation is complete and approved, or for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent audit records, subject to the
confidentiality provisions of Section 1500 of the Rules of Procedure and the provisions of Section 1.4 below.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
Compliance Audits
Self-Certifications
Spot Checking
Compliance Violation Investigations
Self-Reporting
Complaints Text
Page 8 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
2. Table of Compliance Elements
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Long-term High The Transmission The Transmission The Transmission The Transmission
Planning Owner performed an Owner performed an Owner performed an Owner performed an
initial risk initial risk assessment initial risk assessment initial risk
assessment but did but did so more than but did so more than assessment but did
so after the date two calendar months four calendar months so more than six
specified in the after the date after the date calendar months
implementation plan specified in the specified in the after the date
for performing the implementation plan implementation plan specified in the
initial risk for performing the for performing the implementation plan
assessment but less initial risk assessment initial risk assessment for performing the
than or equal to two but less than or equal but less than or equal initial risk
calendar months to four calendar to six calendar months assessment;
after that date; months after that after that date;
OR
date;
OR OR
The Transmission
OR
The Transmission The Transmission Owner failed to
Owner that has The Transmission Owner that has perform an initial
identified in its Owner that has identified in its risk assessment;
previous risk identified in its previous risk
OR
assessment one or previous risk assessment one or
The Transmission
more Transmission assessment one or more Transmission
Owner that has
stations or more Transmission stations or
identified in its
Transmission stations or Transmission
previous risk
substations that if Transmission substations that if
assessment one or
rendered inoperable substations that if rendered inoperable
more Transmission
Page 9 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
or damaged could rendered inoperable or damaged could stations or
result in instability, or damaged could result in instability, Transmission
uncontrolled result in instability, uncontrolled substations that if
separation, or uncontrolled separation, or rendered inoperable
Cascading within an separation, or Cascading within an or damaged could
Interconnection Cascading within an Interconnection result in instability,
performed a Interconnection performed a uncontrolled
subsequent risk performed a subsequent risk separation, or
assessment but did subsequent risk assessment but did so Cascading within an
so after 30 calendar assessment but did so after 34 calendar Interconnection
months but less than after 32 calendar months but less than performed a
or equal to 32 months but less than or equal to 36 subsequent risk
calendar months; or equal to 34 calendar months; assessment but did
calendar months; so after more than
OR OR
36 calendar months;
OR
The Transmission The Transmission
OR
Owner that has not The Transmission Owner that has not
identified in its Owner that has not identified in its The Transmission
previous risk identified in its previous risk Owner that has
assessment any previous risk assessment any identified in its
Transmission assessment any Transmission stations previous risk
stations or Transmission stations or Transmission assessment one or
Transmission or Transmission substations that if more Transmission
substations that if substations that if rendered inoperable stations or
rendered inoperable rendered inoperable or damaged could Transmission
or damaged could or damaged could result in instability, substations that if
result in instability, result in instability, uncontrolled rendered inoperable
uncontrolled uncontrolled separation, or or damaged could
separation, or separation, or Cascading within an result in instability,
Cascading within an Cascading within an Interconnection uncontrolled
Page 10 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Interconnection Interconnection performed a separation, or
performed a performed a subsequent risk Cascading within an
subsequent risk subsequent risk assessment but did so Interconnection
assessment but did assessment but did so after 64 calendar failed to perform a
so after 60 calendar after 62 calendar months but less than risk assessment;
months but less than months but less than or equal to 66
OR
or equal to 62 or equal to 64 calendar months;
The Transmission
calendar months. calendar months.
OR
Owner that has not
The Transmission identified in its
Owner performed a previous risk
risk assessment but assessment any
failed to include Part Transmission
1.2. stations or
Transmission
substations that if
rendered inoperable
or damaged could
result in instability,
uncontrolled
separation, or
Cascading within an
Interconnection
performed a
subsequent risk
assessment but did
so after more than
66 calendar months;
OR
Page 11 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Transmission
Owner that has not
identified in its
previous risk
assessment any
Transmission station
and Transmission
substations that if
rendered inoperable
or damaged could
result in instability,
uncontrolled
separation, or
Cascading within an
Interconnection
failed to perform a
subsequent risk
assessment.
R2 Long-term Medium The Transmission The Transmission The Transmission The Transmission
Planning Owner had an Owner had an Owner had an Owner had an
unaffiliated third unaffiliated third unaffiliated third party unaffiliated third
party verify the risk party verify the risk verify the risk party verify the risk
assessment assessment assessment performed assessment
performed under performed under under Requirement R1 performed under
Requirement R1 but Requirement R1 but but did so more than Requirement R1 but
did so in more than did so more than 100 110 calendar days but did so more than
90 calendar days but calendar days but less than or equal to 120 calendar days
less than or equal to less than or equal to 120 calendar days following
100 calendar days 110 calendar days
Page 12 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
following completion following completion following completion completion of
of Requirement R1; of Requirement R1; of Requirement R1; Requirement R1;
OR Or OR OR
The Transmission The Transmission The Transmission The Transmission
Owner had an Owner had an Owner had an Owner failed to have
unaffiliated third unaffiliated third unaffiliated third party an unaffiliated third
party verify the risk party verify the risk verify the risk party verify the risk
assessment assessment assessment performed assessment
performed under performed under under Requirement R1 performed under
Requirement R1 and Requirement R1 and and modified or Requirement R1;
modified or modified or documented the
OR
documented the documented the technical basis for not
The Transmission
technical basis for technical basis for modifying its
Owner had an
not modifying its not modifying its identification under
unaffiliated third
identification under identification under Requirement R1 as
party verify the risk
Requirement R1 as Requirement R1 as required by Part 2.3
assessment
required by Part 2.3 required by Part 2.3 but did so more than
performed under
but did so more than but did so more than 80 calendar days from
Requirement R1 but
60 calendar days and 70 calendar days and completion of the
failed to implement
less than or equal to less than or equal to third party
procedures for
70 calendar days 80 calendar days verification;
protecting
from completion of from completion of
OR
information per Part
the third party the third party
The Transmission 2.4.
verification. verification.
Owner had an
unaffiliated third party
verify the risk
assessment performed
under Requirement R1
Page 13 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
but failed to modify or
document the
technical basis for not
modifying its
identification under
R1 as required by Part
2.3.
R3 Long-term Lower The Transmission The Transmission The Transmission The Transmission
Planning Owner notified the Owner notified the Owner notified the Owner notified the
Transmission Transmission Transmission Operator Transmission
Operator that Operator that that operates the Operator that
operates the primary operates the primary primary control center operates the primary
control center as control center as as specified in control center as
specified in specified in Requirement R3 but specified in
Requirement R3 but Requirement R3 but did so more than 11 Requirement R3 but
did so more than did so more than nine calendar days and less did so more than 13
seven calendar days calendar days and than or equal to 13 calendar days
and less than or equal less than or equal to calendar days following the
to nine calendar days 11 calendar days following the completion of
following the following the completion of Requirement R2;
completion of completion of Requirement R2;
OR
Requirement R2; Requirement R2;
OR
The Transmission
OR OR
The Transmission Owner failed to
The Transmission The Transmission Owner notified the notify the
Owner notified the Owner notified the Transmission Operator Transmission
Transmission Transmission that operates the Operator that it
Operator that Operator that primary control center operates a control
operates the primary operates the primary of the removal from
Page 14 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
control center of the control center of the the identification in center identified in
removal from the removal from the Requirement R1 but Requirement R1;
identification in identification in did so more than 11
OR
Requirement R1 but Requirement R1 but calendar days and less
The Transmission
did so more than did so more than nine than or equal to 13
Owner notified the
seven calendar days calendar days and calendar days
Transmission
and less than or equal less than or equal to following the
Operator that
to nine calendar days 11 calendar days verification or the
operates the primary
following the following the subsequent risk
control center of the
verification or the verification or the assessment.
removal from the
subsequent risk subsequent risk
identification in
assessment. assessment.
Requirement R1 but
did so more than 13
calendar days
following the
verification or the
subsequent risk
assessment.
OR
The Transmission
Owner failed to
notify the
Transmission
Operator that
operates the primary
control center of the
removal from the
Page 15 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
identification in
Requirement R1.
R4 Operations Medium N/A The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible
Planning, Entity conducted an Entity conducted an Entity failed to
Long-term evaluation of the evaluation of the conduct an
Planning potential physical potential physical evaluation of the
threats and threats and potential physical
vulnerabilities to vulnerabilities to threats and
each of its each of its vulnerabilities to
Transmission Transmission each of its
station(s), station(s), Transmission
Transmission Transmission station(s),
substation(s), and substation(s), and Transmission
primary control primary control substation(s), and
center(s) identified center(s) identified in primary control
in Requirement R1 Requirement R1 but center(s) identified
but failed to failed to consider two in Requirement R1;
consider one of of Parts 4.1 through
OR
Parts 4.1 through 4.3 4.3 in the evaluation.
The Responsible
in the evaluation.
Entity conducted an
evaluation of the
potential physical
threats and
vulnerabilities to
each of its
Transmission
station(s),
Transmission
Page 16 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
substation(s), and
primary control
center(s) identified
in Requirement R1
but failed to
consider Parts 4.1
through 4.3.
R5 Long-term High The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible Entity The Responsible
Planning Entity developed and Entity developed and developed and Entity developed and
implemented a implemented a implemented a implemented a
documented physical documented physical documented physical documented
security plan(s) that security plan(s) that security plan(s) that physical security
covers each of its covers each of its covers each of its plan(s) that covers
Transmission Transmission Transmission each of its
station(s), station(s), station(s), Transmission
Transmission Transmission Transmission station(s),
substation(s), and substation(s), and substation(s), and Transmission
primary control primary control primary control substation(s), and
center(s) identified in center(s) identified in center(s) identified in primary control
Requirement R1 but Requirement R1 but Requirement R1 but center(s) identified
did so more than 120 did so more than 130 did so more than 140 in Requirement R1
calendar days but calendar days but calendar days but less but did so more than
less than or equal to less than or equal to than or equal to 150 150 calendar days
130 calendar days 140 calendar days calendar days after after completing the
after completing after completing completing verification in
Requirement R2; Requirement R2; Requirement R2; Requirement R2;
OR OR OR OR
Page 17 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible Entity The Responsible
Entity developed and Entity developed and developed and Entity failed to
implemented a implemented a implemented a develop and
documented physical documented physical documented physical implement a
security plan(s) that security plan(s) that security plan(s) that documented
covers its covers its covers its physical security
Transmission Transmission Transmission plan(s) that covers
station(s), station(s), station(s), its Transmission
Transmission Transmission Transmission station(s),
substation(s), and substation(s), and substation(s), and Transmission
primary control primary control primary control substation(s), and
center(s) identified in center(s) identified in center(s) identified in primary control
Requirement R1 and Requirement R1 and Requirement R1 and center(s) identified
verified according to verified according to verified according to in Requirement R1
Requirement R2 but Requirement R2 but Requirement R2 but and verified
failed to include one failed to include two failed to include three according to
of Parts 5.1 through of Parts 5.1 through of Parts 5.1 through Requirement R2.
5.4 in the plan. 5.4 in the plan. 5.4 in the plan.
OR
The Responsible
Entity developed and
implemented a
documented
physical security
plan(s) that covers
its Transmission
station(s),
Transmission
substation(s), and
primary control
Page 18 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
center(s) identified
in Requirement R1
and verified
according to
Requirement 2 but
failed to include
Parts 5.1 through 5.4
in the plan.
R6 Long-term Medium The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible Entity The Responsible
Planning Entity had an Entity had an had an unaffiliated Entity failed to have
unaffiliated third unaffiliated third third party review the an unaffiliated third
party review the party review the evaluation performed party review the
evaluation performed evaluation performed under Requirement R4 evaluation
under Requirement under Requirement and the security performed under
R4 and the security R4 and the security plan(s) developed Requirement R4 and
plan(s) developed plan(s) developed under Requirement R5 the security plan(s)
under Requirement under Requirement but did so more than developed under
R5 but did so in more R5 but did so in more 110 calendar days but Requirement R5 in
than 90 calendar days than 100 calendar less than or equal to more than 120
but less than or equal days but less than or 120 calendar days; calendar days;
to 100 calendar days; equal to 110 calendar
OR OR
days;
OR
The Responsible Entity The Responsible
OR
The Responsible had an unaffiliated Entity failed to have
Entity had an The Responsible third party review the an unaffiliated third
unaffiliated third Entity had an evaluation performed party review the
party review the unaffiliated third under Requirement R4 evaluation
evaluation performed party review the and the security performed under
under Requirement evaluation performed plan(s) developed Requirement R4 and
Page 19 of 36
CIP-014-3 — Physical Security
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-014-3)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R4 and the security under Requirement under Requirement R5 the security plan(s)
plan(s) developed R4 and the security and modified or developed under
under Requirement plan(s) developed documented the Requirement R5;
R5 and modified or under Requirement reason for not
OR
documented the R5 and modified or modifying the security
The Responsible
reason for not documented the plan(s) as specified in
Entity had an
modifying the reason for not Part 6.3 but did so
unaffiliated third
security plan(s) as modifying the more than 80 calendar
party review the
specified in Part 6.3 security plan(s) as days following
evaluation
but did so more than specified in Part 6.3 completion of the
performed under
60 calendar days and but did so more than third party review;
Requirement R4 and
less than or equal to 70 calendar days and
OR
the security plan(s)
70 calendar days less than or equal to
The Responsible Entity developed under
following completion 80 calendar days
had an unaffiliated Requirement R5 but
of the third party following completion
third party review the failed to implement
review. of the third party
evaluation performed procedures for
review.
under Requirement R4 protecting
and the security information per Part
plan(s) developed 6.4.
under Requirement R5
but did not document
the reason for not
modifying the security
plan(s) as specified in
Part 6.3.
Page 20 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 October 1, Effective Date New
2015
2 April 16, 2015 Revised to meet FERC Order 802 Revision
directive to remove “widespread”.
2 May 7, 2015 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees
2 July 14, 2015 FERC Letter Order in Docket No.
RD15-4-000 approving CIP-014-2
3 January 19, Revised to remove Compliance Section Revision
2022 1.4
3 June 16, 2022 FERC Letter Order in Docket No.RD22-3-
000 approving Modifications to CIP-
014-3
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Section 4 Applicability
The purpose of Reliability Standard CIP-014 is to protect Transmission stations and
Transmission substations, and their associated primary control centers that if rendered
inoperable or damaged as a result of a physical attack could result in instability, uncontrolled
separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection. To properly include those entities that own
or operate such Facilities, the Reliability Standard CIP-014 first applies to Transmission Owners
that own Transmission Facilities that meet the specific criteria in Applicability Section 4.1.1.1
through 4.1.1.4. The Facilities described in Applicability Section 4.1.1.1 through 4.1.1.4 mirror
those Transmission Facilities that meet the bright line criteria for “Medium Impact”
Transmission Facilities under Attachment 1 of Reliability Standard CIP-002-5.1. Each
Transmission Owner that owns Transmission Facilities that meet the criteria in Section 4.1.1.1
Page 21 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
through 4.1.1.4 is required to perform a risk assessment as specified in Requirement R1 to
identify its Transmission stations and Transmission substations, and their associated primary
control centers, that if rendered inoperable or damaged as a result of a physical attack could
result in instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection. The
Standard Drafting Team (SDT) expects this population will be small and that many Transmission
Owners that meet the applicability of this standard will not actually identify any such Facilities.
Only those Transmission Owners with Transmission stations or Transmission substations
identified in the risk assessment (and verified under Requirement R2) have performance
obligations under Requirements R3 through R6.
This standard also applies to Transmission Operators. A Transmission Operator’s obligations
under the standard, however, are only triggered if the Transmission Operator is notified by an
applicable Transmission Owner under Requirement R3 that the Transmission Operator operates
a primary control center that operationally controls a Transmission station(s) or Transmission
substation(s) identified in the Requirement R1 risk assessment. A primary control center
operationally controls a Transmission station or Transmission substation when the control
center’s electronic actions can cause direct physical action at the identified Transmission
station or Transmission substation, such as opening a breaker, as opposed to a control center
that only has information from the Transmission station or Transmission substation and must
coordinate direct action through another entity. Only Transmission Operators who are notified
that they have primary control centers under this standard have performance obligations under
Requirements R4 through R6. In other words, primary control center for purposes of this
Standard is the control center that the Transmission Owner or Transmission Operator,
respectively, uses as its primary, permanently-manned site to physically operate a Transmission
station or Transmission substation that is identified in Requirement R1 and verified in
Requirement R2. Control centers that provide back-up capability are not applicable, as they
are a form of resiliency and intentionally redundant.
The SDT considered several options for bright line criteria that could be used to determine
applicability and provide an initial threshold that defines the set of Transmission stations and
Transmission substations that would meet the directives of the FERC order on physical security
(i.e., those that could cause instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an
Interconnection). The SDT determined that using the criteria for Medium Impact Transmission
Facilities in Attachment 1 of CIP-002-5.1 would provide a conservative threshold for defining
which Transmission stations and Transmission substations must be included in the risk
assessment in Requirement R1 of CIP-014. Additionally, the SDT concluded that using the CIP-
002-5.1 Medium Impact criteria was appropriate because it has been approved by
stakeholders, NERC, and FERC, and its use provides a technically sound basis to determine
which Transmission Owners should conduct the risk assessment. As described in CIP-002-5.1,
the failure of a Transmission station or Transmission substation that meets the Medium Impact
criteria could have the capability to result in exceeding one or more Interconnection Reliability
Operating Limits (IROLs). The SDT understands that using this bright line criteria to determine
applicability may require some Transmission Owners to perform risk assessments under
Requirement R1 that will result in a finding that none of their Transmission stations or
Transmission substations would pose a risk of instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading
Page 22 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
within an Interconnection. However, the SDT determined that higher bright lines could not be
technically justified to ensure inclusion of all Transmission stations and Transmission
substations, and their associated primary control centers that, if rendered inoperable or
damaged as a result of a physical attack could result in instability, uncontrolled separation, or
Cascading within an Interconnection. Further guidance and technical basis for the bright line
criteria for Medium Impact Facilities can be found in the Guidelines and Technical Basis section
of CIP-002-5.1.
Additionally, the SDT determined that it was not necessary to include Generator Operators and
Generator Owners in the Reliability Standard. First, Transmission stations or Transmission
substations interconnecting generation facilities are considered when determining applicability.
Transmission Owners will consider those Transmission stations and Transmission substations
that include a Transmission station on the high side of the Generator Step-up transformer
(GSU) using Applicability Section 4.1.1.1 and 4.1.1.2. As an example, a Transmission station or
Transmission substation identified as a Transmission Owner facility that interconnects
generation will be subject to the Requirement R1 risk assessment if it operates at 500kV or
greater or if it is connected at 200 kV – 499kV to three or more other Transmission stations or
Transmission substations and has an "aggregate weighted value" exceeding 3000 according to
the table in Applicability Section 4.1.1.2. Second, the Transmission analysis or analyses
conducted under Requirement R1 should take into account the impact of the loss of generation
connected to applicable Transmission stations or Transmission substations. Additionally, the
FERC order does not explicitly mention generation assets and is reasonably understood to focus
on the most critical Transmission Facilities. The diagram below shows an example of a station.
Page 23 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Also, the SDT uses the phrase “Transmission stations or Transmission substations” to recognize
the existence of both stations and substations. Many entities in industry consider a substation
to be a location with physical borders (i.e. fence, wall, etc.) that contains at least an
autotransformer. Locations also exist that do not contain autotransformers, and many entities
in industry refer to those locations as stations (switching stations or switchyards). Therefore,
the SDT chose to use both “station” and “substation” to refer to the locations where groups of
Transmission Facilities exist.
On the issue of joint ownership, the SDT recognizes that this issue is not unique to CIP-014, and
expects that the applicable Transmission Owners and Transmission Operators will develop
memorandums of understanding, agreements, Coordinated Functional Registrations, or
procedures, etc., to designate responsibilities under CIP-014 when joint ownership is at issue,
which is similar to what many entities have completed for other Reliability Standards.
The language contained in the applicability section regarding the collector bus is directly copied
from CIP-002-5.1, Attachment 1, and has no additional meaning within the CIP-014 standard.
Requirement R1
The initial risk assessment required under Requirement R1 must be completed on or before the
effective date of the standard. Subsequent risk assessments are to be performed at least once
every 30 or 60 months depending on the results of the previous risk assessment per
Requirement R1, Part 1.1. In performing the risk assessment under Requirement R1, the
Transmission Owner should first identify their population of Transmission stations and
Transmission substations that meet the criteria contained in Applicability Section 4.1.1.
Requirement R1 then requires the Transmission Owner to perform a risk assessment, consisting
of a transmission analysis, to determine which of those Transmission stations and Transmission
Substations if rendered inoperable or damaged could result in instability, uncontrolled
separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection. The requirement is not to require
identification of, and thus, not intended to bring within the scope of the standard a
Transmission station or Transmission substation unless the applicable Transmission Owner
determines through technical studies and analyses based on objective analysis, technical
expertise, operating experience and experienced judgment that the loss of such facility would
have a critical impact on the operation of the Interconnection in the event the asset is rendered
inoperable or damaged. In the November 20, 2014 Order, FERC reiterated that “only an
instability that has a “critical impact on the operation of the interconnection” warrants finding
that the facility causing the instability is critical under Requirement R1.” The Transmission
Owner may determine the criteria for critical impact by considering, among other criteria, any
of the following:
• Criteria or methodology used by Transmission Planners or Planning Coordinators in TPL-
001-4, Requirement R6
• NERC EOP-004-2 reporting criteria
Page 24 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
• Area or magnitude of potential impact
The standard does not mandate the specific analytical method for performing the risk
assessment. The Transmission Owner has the discretion to choose the specific method that
best suites its needs. As an example, an entity may perform a Power Flow analysis and stability
analysis at a variety of load levels.
Performing Risk Assessments
The Transmission Owner has the discretion to select a transmission analysis method that fits its
facts and system circumstances. To mandate a specific approach is not technically desirable
and may lead to results that fail to adequately consider regional, topological, and system
circumstances. The following guidance is only an example on how a Transmission Owner may
perform a power flow and/or stability analysis to identify those Transmission stations and
Transmission substations that if rendered inoperable or damaged as a result of a physical attack
could result in instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection. An
entity could remove all lines, without regard to the voltage level, to a single Transmission
station or Transmission substation and review the simulation results to assess system behavior
to determine if Cascading of Transmission Facilities, uncontrolled separation, or voltage or
frequency instability is likely to occur over a significant area of the Interconnection. Using
engineering judgment, the Transmission Owner (possibly in consultation with regional planning
or operation committees and/or ISO/RTO committee input) should develop criteria (e.g.
imposing a fault near the removed Transmission station or Transmission substation) to identify
a contingency or parameters that result in potential instability, uncontrolled separation, or
Cascading within an Interconnection. Regional consultation on these matters is likely to be
helpful and informative, given that the inputs for the risk assessment and the attributes of what
constitutes instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection will
likely vary from region-to-region or from ISO-to-ISO based on topology, system characteristics,
and system configurations. Criteria could also include post-contingency facilities loadings above
a certain emergency rating or failure of a power flow case to converge. Available special
protection systems (SPS), if any, could be applied to determine if the system experiences any
additional instability which may result in uncontrolled separation. Example criteria may
include:
(a) Thermal overloads beyond facility emergency ratings;
(b) Voltage deviation exceeding ± 10%; or
(c) Cascading outage/voltage collapse; or
(d) Frequency below under-frequency load shed points
Periodicity
A Transmission Owner who identifies one or more Transmission stations or Transmission
substations (as verified under Requirement R2) that if rendered inoperable or damaged could
Page 25 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
result in instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection is required
to conduct a risk assessment at least once every 30 months. This period ensures that the risk
assessment remains current with projected conditions and configurations in the planned
system. This risk assessment, as the initial assessment, must consider applicable planned
Transmission stations and Transmission substations to be in service within 24 months. The 30
month timeframe aligns with the 24 month planned to be in service date because the
Transmission Owner is provided the flexibility, depending on its planning cycle and the
frequency in which it may plan to construct a new Transmission station or Transmission
substation to more closely align these dates. The requirement is to conduct the risk assessment
at least once every 30 months, so for a Transmission Owner that believes it is better to conduct
a risk assessment once every 24 months, because of its planning cycle, it has the flexibility to do
so.
Transmission Owners that have not identified any Transmission stations or Transmission
substations (as verified under Requirement R2) that if rendered inoperable or damaged could
result in instability, uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection are
unlikely to see changes to their risk assessment in the Near-Term Planning Horizon.
Consequently, a 60 month periodicity for completing a subsequent risk assessment is specified.
Identification of Primary Control Centers
After completing the risk assessment specified in Requirement R1, it is important to additionally
identify the primary control center that operationally controls each Transmission station or
Transmission substation that if rendered inoperable or damaged could result in instability,
uncontrolled separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection. A primary control center
“operationally controls” a Transmission station or Transmission substation when the control
center’s electronic actions can cause direct physical actions at the identified Transmission
station and Transmission substation, such as opening a breaker.
Requirement R2
This requirement specifies verification of the risk assessment performed under Requirement R1
by an entity other than the owner or operator of the Requirement R1 risk assessment.
A verification of the risk assessment by an unaffiliated third party, as specified in Requirement
R2, could consist of:
1. Certifying that the Requirement R1 risk assessment considers the Transmission stations
and Transmission substations identified in Applicability Section 4.1.1.
2. Review of the model used to conduct the risk assessment to ensure it contains sufficient
system topology to identify Transmission stations and Transmission substations that if
rendered inoperable or damaged could cause instability, uncontrolled separation, or
Cascading within an Interconnection.
3. Review of the Requirement R1 risk assessment methodology.
Page 26 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
This requirement provides the flexibility for a Transmission Owner to select from unaffiliated
registered and non-registered entities with transmission planning or analysis experience to
perform the verification of the Requirement R1 risk assessment. The term unaffiliated means
that the selected verifying entity cannot be a corporate affiliate (i.e., the verifying or third party
reviewer cannot be an entity that corporately controls, is controlled by or is under common
control with, the Transmission Owner). The verifying entity also cannot be a division of the
Transmission Owner that operates as a functional unit.
The prohibition on registered entities using a corporate affiliate to conduct the verification,
however, does not prohibit a governmental entity (e.g., a city, a municipality, a U.S. federal
power marketing agency, or any other political subdivision of U.S. or Canadian federal, state, or
provincial governments) from selecting as the verifying entity another governmental entity
within the same political subdivision. For instance, a U.S. federal power marketing agency may
select as its verifier another U.S. federal agency to conduct its verification so long as the
selected entity has transmission planning or analysis experience. Similarly, a Transmission
Owner owned by a Canadian province can use a separate agency of that province to perform
the verification. The verifying entity, however, must still be a third party and cannot be a
division of the registered entity that operates as a functional unit.
Requirement R2 also provides that the “verification may occur concurrent with or after the risk
assessment performed under Requirement R1.” This provision is designed to provide the
Transmission Owner the flexibility to work with the verifying entity throughout (i.e., concurrent
with) the risk assessment, which for some Transmission Owners may be more efficient and
effective. In other words, a Transmission Owner could collaborate with their unaffiliated
verifying entity to perform the risk assessment under Requirement R1 such that both
Requirement R1 and Requirement R2 are satisfied concurrently. The intent of Requirement R2
is to have an entity other than the owner or operator of the facility to be involved in the risk
assessment process and have an opportunity to provide input. Accordingly, Requirement R2 is
designed to allow entities the discretion to have a two-step process, where the Transmission
Owner performs the risk assessment and subsequently has a third party review that
assessment, or a one-step process, where the entity collaborates with a third party to perform
the risk assessment.
Characteristics to consider in selecting a third party reviewer could include:
• Registered Entity with applicable planning and reliability functions.
• Experience in power system studies and planning.
• The entity’s understanding of the MOD standards, TPL standards, and facility ratings as
they pertain to planning studies.
• The entity’s familiarity with the Interconnection within which the Transmission Owner is
located.
With respect to the requirement that Transmission owners develop and implement procedures
for protecting confidential and sensitive information, the Transmission Owner could have a
method for identifying documents that require confidential treatment. One mechanism for
Page 27 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
protecting confidential or sensitive information is to prohibit removal of sensitive or
confidential information from the Transmission Owner’s site. Transmission Owners could
include such a prohibition in a non-disclosure agreement with the verifying entity.
A Technical feasibility study is not required in the Requirement R2 documentation of the
technical basis for not modifying the identification in accordance with the recommendation.
On the issue of the difference between a verifier in Requirement R2 and a reviewer in
Requirement R6, the SDT indicates that the verifier will confirm that the risk assessment was
completed in accordance with Requirement R1, including the number of Transmission stations
and substations identified, while the reviewer in Requirement R6 is providing expertise on the
manner in which the evaluation of threats was conducted in accordance with Requirement R4,
and the physical security plan in accordance with Requirement R5. In the latter situation there
is no verification of a technical analysis, rather an application of experience and expertise to
provide guidance or recommendations, if needed.
Parts 2.4 and 6.4 require the entities to have procedures to protect the confidentiality of
sensitive or confidential information. Those procedures may include the following elements:
1. Control and retention of information on site for third party verifiers/reviewers.
2. Only “need to know” employees, etc., get the information.
3. Marking documents as confidential
4. Securely storing and destroying information when no longer needed.
5. Not releasing information outside the entity without, for example, General
Counsel sign-off.
Requirement R3
Some Transmission Operators will have obligations under this standard for certain primary
control centers. Those obligations, however, are contingent upon a Transmission Owner first
completing the risk assessment specified by Requirement R1 and the verification specified by
Requirement R2. Requirement R3 is intended to ensure that a Transmission Operator that has
operational control of a primary control center identified in Requirement R1 receive notice so
that the Transmission Operator may fulfill the rest of the obligations required in Requirements
R4 through R6. Since the timing obligations in Requirements R4 through R6 are based upon
completion of Requirement R2, the Transmission Owner must also include within the notice the
date of completion of Requirement R2. Similarly, the Transmission Owner must notify the
Transmission Operator of any removals from identification that result from a subsequent risk
assessment under Requirement R1 or as a result of the verification process under Requirement
R2.
Requirement R4
Page 28 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
This requirement requires owners and operators of facilities identified by the Requirement R1
risk assessment and that are verified under Requirement R2 to conduct an assessment of
potential threats and vulnerabilities to those Transmission stations, Transmission substations,
and primary control centers using a tailored evaluation process. Threats and vulnerabilities may
vary from facility to facility based on any number of factors that include, but are not limited to,
location, size, function, existing physical security protections, and attractiveness as a target.
In order to effectively conduct a threat and vulnerability assessment, the asset owner may be
the best source to determine specific site vulnerabilities, but current and evolving threats may
best be determined by others in the intelligence or law enforcement communities. A number of
resources have been identified in the standard, but many others exist and asset owners are not
limited to where they may turn for assistance. Additional resources may include state or local
fusion centers, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI),
Public Safety Canada, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and InfraGard chapters coordinated by
the FBI.
The Responsible Entity is required to take a number of factors into account in Parts 4.1 to 4.3 in
order to make a risk-based evaluation under Requirement R4.
To assist in determining the current threat for a facility, the prior history of attacks on similarly
protected facilities should be considered when assessing probability and likelihood of
occurrence at the facility in question.
Resources that may be useful in conducting threat and vulnerability assessments include:
• NERC Security Guideline for the Electricity Sector: Physical Security.
• NERC Security Guideline: Physical Security Response.
• ASIS International General Risk Assessment Guidelines.
• ASIS International Facilities Physical Security Measure Guideline.
• ASIS International Security Management Standard: Physical Asset Protection.
• Whole Building Design Guide - Threat/Vulnerability Assessments.
Requirement R5
This requirement specifies development and implementation of a security plan(s) designed to
protect against attacks to the facilities identified in Requirement R1 based on the assessment
performed under Requirement R4.
Requirement R5 specifies the following attributes for the physical security plan:
• Resiliency or security measures designed collectively to deter, detect, delay, assess,
communicate, and respond to potential physical threats and vulnerabilities identified
during the evaluation conducted in Requirement R4.
Resiliency may include, among other things:
Page 29 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
a. System topology changes,
b. Spare equipment,
c. Construction of a new Transmission station or Transmission substation.
While most security measures will work together to collectively harden the entire site,
some may be allocated to protect specific critical components. For example, if
protection from gunfire is considered necessary, the entity may only install ballistic
protection for critical components, not the entire site.
• Law enforcement contact and coordination information.
Examples of such information may be posting 9-1-1 for emergency calls and providing
substation safety and familiarization training for local and federal law enforcement, fire
department, and Emergency Medical Services.
• A timeline for executing the physical security enhancements and modifications specified
in the physical security plan.
Entities have the flexibility to prioritize the implementation of the various resiliency or
security enhancements and modifications in their security plan according to risk,
resources, or other factors. The requirement to include a timeline in the physical
security plan for executing the actual physical security enhancements and modifications
does not also require that the enhancements and modifications be completed within
120 days. The actual timeline may extend beyond the 120 days, depending on the
amount of work to be completed.
• Provisions to evaluate evolving physical threats, and their corresponding security
measures, to the Transmission station(s), Transmission substation(s), or primary control
center(s).
A registered entity's physical security plan should include processes and responsibilities
for obtaining and handling alerts, intelligence, and threat warnings from various
sources. Some of these sources could include the ERO, ES-ISAC, and US and/or Canadian
federal agencies. This information should be used to reevaluate or consider changes in
the security plan and corresponding security measures of the security plan found in R5.
Incremental changes made to the physical security plan prior to the next required third
party review do not require additional third party reviews.
Requirement R6
This requirement specifies review by an entity other than the Transmission Owner or
Transmission Operator with appropriate expertise for the evaluation performed according to
Requirement R4 and the security plan(s) developed according to Requirement R5. As with
Requirement R2, the term unaffiliated means that the selected third party reviewer cannot be a
corporate affiliate (i.e., the third party reviewer cannot be an entity that corporately controls, is
controlled by or is under common control with, the Transmission Operator). A third party
Page 30 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
reviewer also cannot be a division of the Transmission Operator that operates as a functional
unit.
As noted in the guidance for Requirement R2, the prohibition on registered entities using a
corporate affiliate to conduct the review, however, does not prohibit a governmental entity
from selecting as the third party reviewer another governmental entity within the same
political subdivision. For instance, a city or municipality may use its local enforcement agency,
so long as the local law enforcement agency satisfies the criteria in Requirement R6. The third
party reviewer, however, must still be a third party and cannot be a division of the registered
entity that operates as a functional unit.
The Responsible Entity can select from several possible entities to perform the review:
• An entity or organization with electric industry physical security experience and whose
review staff has at least one member who holds either a Certified Protection
Professional (CPP) or Physical Security Professional (PSP) certification.
In selecting CPP and PSP for use in this standard, the SDT believed it was important
that if a private entity such as a consulting or security firm was engaged to conduct
the third party review, they must tangibly demonstrate competence to conduct the
review. This includes electric industry physical security experience and either of the
premier security industry certifications sponsored by ASIS International. The ASIS
certification program was initiated in 1977, and those that hold the CPP certification
are board certified in security management. Those that hold the PSP certification are
board certified in physical security.
• An entity or organization approved by the ERO.
• A governmental agency with physical security expertise.
• An entity or organization with demonstrated law enforcement, government, or
military physical security expertise.
As with the verification under Requirement R2, Requirement R6 provides that the “review may
occur concurrently with or after completion of the evaluation performed under Requirement
R4 and the security plan development under Requirement R5.” This provision is designed to
provide applicable Transmission Owners and Transmission Operators the flexibility to work with
the third party reviewer throughout (i.e., concurrent with) the evaluation performed according
to Requirement R4 and the security plan(s) developed according to Requirement R5, which for
some Responsible Entities may be more efficient and effective. In other words, a Transmission
Owner or Transmission Operator could collaborate with their unaffiliated third party reviewer
to perform an evaluation of potential threats and vulnerabilities (Requirement R4) and develop
a security plan (Requirement R5) to satisfy Requirements R4 through R6 simultaneously. The
intent of Requirement R6 is to have an entity other than the owner or operator of the facility to
be involved in the Requirement R4 evaluation and the development of the Requirement R5
security plans and have an opportunity to provide input on the evaluation and the security plan.
Accordingly, Requirement R6 is designed to allow entities the discretion to have a two-step
Page 31 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
process, where the Transmission Owner performs the evaluation and develops the security plan
itself and then has a third party review that assessment, or a one-step process, where the entity
collaborates with a third party to perform the evaluation and develop the security plan.
Page 32 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Timeline
Page 33 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Rationale
During development of this standard, text boxes were embedded within the standard to explain
the rationale for various parts of the standard. Upon BOT approval, the text from the rationale
text boxes was moved to this section.
Rationale for Requirement R1:
This requirement meets the FERC directive from paragraph 6 of its March 7, 2014 order on
physical security to perform a risk assessment to identify which facilities if rendered inoperable
or damaged could impact an Interconnection through instability, uncontrolled separation, or
cascading failures. The requirement is not intended to bring within the scope of the standard a
Transmission station or Transmission substation unless the applicable Transmission Owner
determines through technical studies and analyses based on objective analysis, technical
expertise, operating experience and experienced judgment that the loss of such facility would
have a critical impact on the operation of the Interconnection in the event the asset is rendered
inoperable or damaged. In the November 20, 2014 Order, FERC reiterated that “only an
instability that has a “critical impact on the operation of the interconnection” warrants finding
that the facility causing the instability is critical under Requirement R1.” The Transmission
Owner may determine the criteria for critical impact by considering, among other criteria, any
of the following:
• Criteria or methodology used by Transmission Planners or Planning Coordinators in TPL-
001-4, Requirement R6
• NERC EOP-004-2 reporting criteria
• Area or magnitude of potential impact
Requirement R1 also meets the FERC directive for periodic reevaluation of the risk assessment
by requiring the risk assessment to be performed every 30 months (or 60 months for an entity
that has not identified in a previous risk assessment any Transmission stations or Transmission
substations that if rendered inoperable or damaged could result in instability, uncontrolled
separation, or Cascading within an Interconnection).
After identifying each Transmission station and Transmission substation that meets the criteria
in Requirement R1, it is important to additionally identify the primary control center that
operationally controls that Transmission station or Transmission substation (i.e., the control
center whose electronic actions can cause direct physical actions at the identified Transmission
station and Transmission substation, such as opening a breaker, compared to a control center
that only has the ability to monitor the Transmission station and Transmission substation and,
therefore, must coordinate direct physical action through another entity).
Rationale for Requirement R2:
This requirement meets the FERC directive from paragraph 11 in the order on physical security
requiring verification by an entity other than the owner or operator of the risk assessment
performed under Requirement R1.
Page 34 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
This requirement provides the flexibility for a Transmission Owner to select registered and non-
registered entities with transmission planning or analysis experience to perform the verification
of the Requirement R1 risk assessment. The term “unaffiliated” means that the selected
verifying entity cannot be a corporate affiliate (i.e., the verifying entity cannot be an entity that
controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with, the Transmission owner). The
verifying entity also cannot be a division of the Transmission Owner that operates as a
functional unit. The term “unaffiliated” is not intended to prohibit a governmental entity from
using another government entity to be a verifier under Requirement R2.
Requirement R2 also provides the Transmission Owner the flexibility to work with the verifying
entity throughout the Requirement R1 risk assessment, which for some Transmission Owners
may be more efficient and effective. In other words, a Transmission Owner could coordinate
with their unaffiliated verifying entity to perform a Requirement R1 risk assessment to satisfy
both Requirement R1 and Requirement R2 concurrently.
Planning Coordinator is a functional entity listed in Part 2.1. The Planning Coordinator and
Planning Authority are the same entity as shown in the NERC Glossary of Terms Used in NERC
Reliability Standards.
Rationale for Requirement R3:
Some Transmission Operators will have obligations under this standard for certain primary
control centers. Those obligations, however, are contingent upon a Transmission Owner first
identifying which Transmission stations and Transmission substations meet the criteria
specified by Requirement R1, as verified according to Requirement R2. This requirement is
intended to ensure that a Transmission Operator that has operational control of a primary
control center identified in Requirement R1, Part 1.2 of a Transmission station or Transmission
substation verified according to Requirement R2 receives notice of such identification so that
the Transmission Operator may timely fulfill its resulting obligations under Requirements R4
through R6. Since the timing obligations in Requirements R4 through R6 are based upon
completion of Requirement R2, the Transmission Owner must also include notice of the date of
completion of Requirement R2. Similarly, the Transmission Owner must notify the Transmission
Operator of any removals from identification that result from a subsequent risk assessment
under Requirement R1 or the verification process under Requirement R2.
Rationale for Requirement R4:
This requirement meets the FERC directive from paragraph 8 in the order on physical security
that the reliability standard must require tailored evaluation of potential threats and
vulnerabilities to facilities identified in Requirement R1 and verified according to Requirement
R2. Threats and vulnerabilities may vary from facility to facility based on factors such as the
facility’s location, size, function, existing protections, and attractiveness of the target. As such,
the requirement does not mandate a one-size-fits-all approach but requires entities to account
for the unique characteristics of their facilities.
Requirement R4 does not explicitly state when the evaluation of threats and vulnerabilities
must occur or be completed. However, Requirement R5 requires that the entity’s security
Page 35 of 36
Guidelines and Technical Basis
plan(s), which is dependent on the Requirement R4 evaluation, must be completed within 120
calendar days following completion of Requirement R2. Thus, an entity has the flexibility when
to complete the Requirement R4 evaluation, provided that it is completed in time to comply
with the requirement in Requirement R5 to develop a physical security plan 120 calendar days
following completion of Requirement R2.
Rationale for Requirement R5:
This requirement meets the FERC directive from paragraph 9 in the order on physical security
requiring the development and implementation of a security plan(s) designed to protect against
attacks to the facilities identified in Requirement R1 based on the assessment performed under
Requirement R4.
Rationale for Requirement R6:
This requirement meets the FERC directive from paragraph 11 in the order on physical security
requiring review by an entity other than the owner or operator with appropriate expertise of
the evaluation performed according to Requirement R4 and the security plan(s) developed
according to Requirement R5.
As with the verification required by Requirement R2, Requirement R6 provides Transmission
Owners and Transmission Operators the flexibility to work with the third party reviewer
throughout the Requirement R4 evaluation and the development of the Requirement R5
security plan(s). This would allow entities to satisfy their obligations under Requirement R6
concurrent with the satisfaction of their obligations under Requirements R4 and R5.
Page 36 of 36
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-014-3.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-003-11.pdf ---
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
2. Number: CIP-003-11
3. Purpose: To specify consistent and sustainable security management controls that
establish responsibility and accountability to protect BES Cyber Systems
(BCS) against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in
the Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
Page 1 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-003-11:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
Page 2 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between Cyber Systems providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or
more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates: See Implementation Plan for CIP-003-11.
Page 3 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager approval at least
once every 15 calendar months for one or more documented cyber security policies
that collectively address the following topics: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. For its high impact and medium impact BCS, if any:
1.1.1. Personnel and training (CIP-004);
1.1.2. Electronic Security Perimeters (CIP-005) including Interactive Remote
Access;
1.1.3. Physical security of BCS (CIP-006);
1.1.4. System security management (CIP-007);
1.1.5. Incident reporting and response planning (CIP-008);
1.1.6. Recovery plans for BCS (CIP-009);
1.1.7. Configuration change management and vulnerability assessments (CIP-
010);
1.1.8. Information protection (CIP-011); and
1.1.9. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
1.2. For its assets identified in CIP-002 containing low impact BCS, if any:
1.2.1. Cyber security awareness;
1.2.2. Physical security controls;
1.2.3. Electronic access controls;
1.2.4. Cyber Security Incident response;
1.2.5. Transient Cyber Assets (TCA) and Removable Media malicious code risk
mitigation; and
1.2.6. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
M1. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, policy documents; revision
history, records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management
system that indicate review of each cyber security policy at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager for each cyber
security policy.
R2. Each Responsible Entity with at least one asset identified in CIP-002 containing low
impact BCS shall implement one or more documented cyber security plan(s) for its
low impact BCS, and Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI) that supports a low impact BCS,
that include the sections in Attachment 1. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
Page 4 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Note: An inventory, list, or discrete identification of low impact BCS or their BES Cyber
Assets (BCA) is not required. Lists of authorized users are not required.
M2. Evidence shall include each of the documented cyber security plan(s) that collectively
include each of the sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation of the cyber security plan(s). Additional examples of evidence per
section are located in Attachment 2.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall identify a CIP Senior Manager by name and document
any change within 30 calendar days of the change. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated and approved
document from a high-level official designating the name of the individual identified
as the CIP Senior Manager.
R4. The Responsible Entity shall implement a documented process to delegate authority,
unless no delegations are used. Where allowed by the CIP Standards, the CIP Senior
Manager may delegate authority for specific actions to a delegate or delegates. These
delegations shall be documented, including the name or title of the delegate, the
specific actions delegated, and the date of the delegation; approved by the CIP Senior
Manager; and updated within 30 days of any change to the delegation. Delegation
changes do not need to be reinstated with a change to the delegator. [Violation Risk
Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M4. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated document,
approved by the CIP Senior Manager, listing individuals (by name or title) who are
delegated the authority to approve or authorize specifically identified items.
Page 5 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” means
NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing
compliance with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention periods identify the period of
time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance.
For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than
the time since the last audit, the Compliance Enforcement Authority may ask an
entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time
period since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its Compliance Enforcement Authority to retain specific
evidence for a longer period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the
time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The Compliance Enforcement Authority shall keep the last audit records and all
requested and submitted subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: “Compliance Monitoring and
Enforcement Program” or “CMEP” means, depending on the context (1) the NERC
Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program (Appendix 4C to the NERC Rules
of Procedure) or the Commission-approved program of a Regional Entity, as
applicable, or (2) the program, department or organization within NERC or a
Regional Entity that is responsible for performing compliance monitoring and
enforcement activities with respect to Registered Entities’ compliance with
Reliability Standards.
Page 6 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not address one of the nine address two of the nine topics address three of the nine address four or more of the
topics required by required by Requirement R1. topics required by nine topics required by
Requirement R1. (Part 1.1) (Part 1.1) Requirement R1. (Part 1.1) Requirement R1. (Part 1.1)
OR OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not complete its review of complete its review of the one complete its review of the one have any documented cyber
the one or more or more documented cyber or more documented cyber security policies for its high
documented cyber security security policies for its high security policies for its high impact and medium impact
policies for its high impact impact and medium impact impact and medium impact BCS as required by
and medium impact BCS as BCS as required by BCS as required by Requirement R1. (Part 1.1)
required by Requirement R1 Requirement R1 within 16 Requirement R1 within 17
OR
within 15 calendar months calendar months but did calendar months but did
but did complete this complete this review in less complete this review in less The Responsible Entity did not
review in less than or equal than or equal to 17 calendar than or equal to 18 calendar complete its review of the one
to 16 calendar months of months of the previous months of the previous or more documented cyber
the previous review. (Part review. (Part 1.1) review. (Part 1.1) security policies as required by
1.1) Requirement R1 within 18
OR OR
calendar months of the
OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not previous review.
The Responsible Entity did complete its approval of the complete its approval of the (Requirement R1)
not complete its approval of one or more documented one or more documented
OR
the one or more cyber security policies for its cyber security policies for its
documented cyber security high impact and medium high impact and medium The Responsible Entity did not
policies for its high impact impact BCS as required by impact BCS as required by complete its approval of the
and medium impact BCS as Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP one or more documented
required by Requirement R1 Senior Manager within 16 Senior Manager within 17 cyber security policies for its
by the CIP Senior Manager calendar months but did calendar months but did high impact and medium
Page 7 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
within 15 calendar months complete this approval in less complete this approval in less impact BCS as required by
but did complete this than or equal to 17 calendar than or equal to 18 calendar Requirement R1 by the CIP
approval in less than or months of the previous months of the previous Senior Manager within 18
equal to 16 calendar approval. (Part 1.1) approval. (Requirement R1) calendar months of the
months of the previous previous approval. (Part 1.1)
OR OR
approval. (Part 1.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
OR
documented one or more documented one or more The Responsible Entity did
The Responsible Entity cyber security policies for its cyber security policies for its not address four or more of
documented one or more assets identified in CIP-002 assets identified in CIP-002 the seven topics required by
cyber security policies for its containing low impact BCS, containing low impact BCS, Requirement R1. (Part 1.2)
assets identified in CIP-002 but did not address two of the but did not address three of
OR
containing low impact BCS, seven topics required by the seven topics required by
but did not address one of Requirement R1. (Part 1.2) Requirement R1. (Part 1.2) The Responsible Entity did not
the seven topics required by have any documented cyber
OR OR
Requirement R1. (Part 1.2) security policies for its assets
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not identified in CIP-002
OR
complete its review of the one complete its review of the one containing low impact BCS as
The Responsible Entity did or more documented cyber or more documented cyber required by Requirement R1.
not complete its review of security policies for its assets security policies for its assets (Part 1.2)
the one or more identified in CIP-002 identified in CIP-002
OR
documented cyber security containing low impact BCS as containing low impact BCS as
policies for its assets required by Requirement R1 required by Requirement R1 The Responsible Entity did not
identified in CIP-002 within 16 calendar months but within 17 calendar months but complete its approval of the
containing low impact BCS did complete this review in did complete this review in one or more documented
as required by Requirement less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18 cyber security policies for its
R1 within 15 calendar calendar months of the calendar months of the assets identified in CIP-002
months but did complete previous review. (Part 1.2) previous review. (Part 1.2) containing low impact BCS as
this review in less than or required by Requirement R1
OR OR
equal to 16 calendar by the CIP Senior Manager
within 18 calendar months of
Page 8 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
months of the previous The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not the previous approval. (Part
review. (Part 1.2) complete its approval of the complete its approval of the 1.2)
one or more documented one or more documented
OR
cyber security policies for its cyber security policies for its
The Responsible Entity did assets identified in CIP-002 assets identified in CIP-002
not complete its approval of containing low impact BCS as containing low impact BCS as
the one or more required by Requirement R1 required by Requirement R1
documented cyber security by the CIP Senior Manager by the CIP Senior Manager
policies for its assets within 16 calendar months but within 17 calendar months but
identified in CIP-002 did complete this approval in did complete this approval in
containing low impact BCS less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18
as required by Requirement calendar months of the calendar months of the
R1 by the CIP Senior previous approval. (Part 1.2) previous approval. (Part 1.2)
Manager within 15 calendar
months but did complete
this approval in less than or
equal to 16 calendar
months of the previous
approval. (Part 1.2)
R2 The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity failed The Responsible Entity failed The Responsible Entity failed
failed to document cyber to reinforce cyber security to implement the physical to document and implement
security awareness practices at least once every security controls according to one or more cyber security
according to Requirement 15 calendar months according Requirement R2, Attachment plan(s) according to
R2, Attachment 1, Section 1. to Requirement R2, 1, Section 2. (Requirement R2) Requirement R2, Attachment
(Requirement R2) Attachment 1, Section 1. 1. (Requirement R2)
OR
(Requirement R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity failed
OR
The Responsible Entity to permit only necessary
failed to document its cyber The Responsible Entity failed inbound and outbound
security plan(s) for to document physical security electronic access controls
Page 9 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
electronic access controls controls according to according to Requirement R2,
according to Requirement Requirement R2, Attachment Attachment 1, Section 3.1.
R2, Attachment 1, Section 3. 1, Section 2. (Requirement R2) (Requirement R2)
(Requirement R2)
OR OR
OR
The Responsible Entity failed The Responsible Entity failed
The Responsible Entity to document electronic access to test each Cyber Security
failed to document one or controls according to Incident response plan(s) at
more Cyber Security Requirement R2, Attachment least once every 36 calendar
Incident response plan(s) 1, Section 3. (Requirement R2) months according to
according to Requirement Requirement R2, Attachment
OR
R2, Attachment 1, Section 4. 1, Section 4. (Requirement R2)
(Requirement R2) The Responsible Entity failed
OR
to implement authentication
OR
for all Dial-up Connectivity The Responsible Entity failed
The Responsible Entity according to Requirement R2, to notify the Electricity
failed to update each Cyber Attachment 1, Section 3.2 Information Sharing and
Security Incident response (Requirement R2) Analysis Center (E-ISAC)
plan(s) within 180 days according to Requirement R2,
OR
according to Requirement Attachment 1, Section 4.
R2, Attachment 1, Section 4. The Responsible Entity failed (Requirement R2)
(Requirement R2) to include the process for
OR
identification, classification,
OR
and response to Cyber The Responsible Entity failed
The Responsible Entity Security Incidents according to to implement mitigation for
failed to manage its Requirement R2, Attachment the introduction of malicious
Transient Cyber Asset(s) 1, Section 4. (Requirement R2) code for Transient Cyber
according to Requirement Assets managed by the
OR
R2, Attachment 1, Section Responsible Entity according
The Responsible Entity failed
5.1. (Requirement R2) to Requirement R2,
to document the
Page 10 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
OR determination of whether an Attachment 1, Section 5.1.
identified Cyber Security (Requirement R2)
The Responsible Entity
Incident is a Reportable Cyber
failed to document the OR
Security Incident and
Removable Media section(s)
subsequent notification to the The Responsible Entity failed
according to Requirement
Electricity Information Sharing to implement mitigation for
R2, Attachment 1, Section
and Analysis Center (E-ISAC) the introduction of malicious
5.3. (Requirement R2)
according to Requirement R2, code for Transient Cyber
Attachment 1, Section 4. Assets managed by a party
(Requirement R2) other than the Responsible
Entity according to
OR
Requirement R2, Attachment
The Responsible Entity failed 1, Section 5.2. (Requirement
to document mitigation for R2)
the introduction of malicious
OR
code for Transient Cyber
Assets managed by the The Responsible Entity failed
Responsible Entity according to implement mitigation for
to Requirement R2, the threat of detected
Attachment 1, Sections 5.1 malicious code on the
and 5.3. (Requirement R2) Removable Media prior to
connecting Removable Media
OR
according to Requirement R2,
The Responsible Entity failed Attachment 1, Section 5.3.
to document mitigation for (Requirement R2)
the introduction of malicious
code for Transient Cyber
Assets managed by a party
other than the Responsible
Entity according to
Requirement R2, Attachment
Page 11 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
1, Section 5.2. (Requirement
R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity failed
to implement the Removable
Media section(s) according to
Requirement R2, Attachment
1, Section 5.3. (Requirement
R2)
The Responsible Entity did
R3 The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not identify, by name, a CIP
not document changes to document changes to the CIP document changes to the CIP
Senior Manager.
the CIP Senior Manager Senior Manager within 40 Senior Manager within 50
within 30 calendar days but calendar days but did calendar days but did OR
did document this change in document this change in less document this change in less The Responsible Entity did not
less than 40 calendar days than 50 calendar days of the than 60 calendar days of the document changes to the CIP
of the change. change. (Requirement R3) change. (Requirement R3) Senior Manager within 60
(Requirement R3) calendar days of the change.
(Requirement R3)
The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity does
R4
not document changes to not document changes to the not document changes to the not have a process to
the delegate within 30 delegate within 40 calendar delegate within 50 calendar delegate actions from the CIP
calendar days but did days but did document this days but did document this Senior Manager.
document this change in change in less than 50 change in less than 60 (Requirement R4)
less than 40 calendar days calendar days of the change. calendar days of the change.
OR
of the change. (Requirement R4) (Requirement R4)
The Responsible Entity did not
(Requirement R4)
document changes to the
Page 12 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
delegate within 60 calendar
days of the change.
(Requirement R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
•
Implementation Plan for Project 2023-04
•
CIP-003-11 Technical Rationale
Page 13 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and
to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or system
from service in order to perform testing, in
response to FERC order issued September 30,
2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to coordinate
with other CIP
standards and to revise
format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two FERC
directives from Order
No. 791 related to
identify, assess, and
correct language and
communication
networks.
6 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the version
adopted by the Board
on 11/13/2014. Revised
version addresses
remaining directives
from Order No. 791
related to transient
Page 14 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version Date Action Change Tracking
devices and low impact
BES Cyber Systems.
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
7 2/9/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revised to address FERC
Order No. 822 directives
regarding (1) the
definition of LERC and
(2) transient devices.
7 4/19/18 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-7.
Docket No. RM17-11-000
8 5/9/19 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Removed SPS
references.
Revised to address FERC
Order No. 843 regarding
mitigating the risk of
malicious code.
8 7/31/2019 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-8.
Docket No. RD19-5-000.
9 11/16/2022 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revisions to address
NERC Board Resolution
and the Supply Chain
Report
9 3/16/2023 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-9.
Docket No. RD23-3-000.
10 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modifications made by
Project 2016-02
11 12/10/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees Modifications made by
Project 2023-04
Page 15 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Attachment 1
Required Sections for Cyber Security Plan(s)
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in the cyber security
plan(s) required under Requirement R2.
Responsible Entities with multiple-impact BCS ratings can utilize policies, procedures, and
processes for their high or medium impact BCS including any supporting SCI to fulfill the
sections for the development of low impact cyber security plan(s). Each Responsible Entity can
develop a cyber security plan(s) either by individual asset or groups of assets.
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: Each Responsible Entity shall reinforce, at least once
every 15 calendar months, cyber security practices (which may include associated
physical security practices).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Each Responsible Entity shall control physical access,
based on need, as determined by the Responsible Entity, to (1) the asset or the
locations of the low impact BCS within the asset, and (2) the Cyber Asset(s) or Virtual
Cyber Asset (VCA), as specified by the Responsible Entity, that provide electronic
access control(s) implemented for Section 3.1.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: Each Responsible Entity shall control electronic access as
outlined below.
3.1 For each asset containing low impact BCS identified pursuant to CIP-002 and
for SCI that supports a low impact BCS, if any, where electronic access is:
i. Between:
• a low impact BCS; or
• an SCI that supports a low impact BCS
and a Cyber System(s) outside the asset containing:
• the low impact BCS(s); or
• the SCI that supports a low impact BCS;
ii. using a routable protocol when entering or leaving the asset
containing the low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS;
and
iii. not used for time-sensitive communications of Protection Systems;
the Responsible Entity shall implement one or more controls, where Section
3.1. Parts (i), (ii), and (iii) are met, that:
3.1.1 Permit only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access
as determined by the Responsible Entity;
3.1.2 Detect known or suspected malicious communications for
Page 16 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
both inbound and outbound electronic access;
3.1.3 Authenticate each user prior to permitting access to a
network(s) containing low impact BCS or SCI that supports a
low impact BCS, through which user-initiated electronic
access applicable to Section 3.1 is subsequently permitted;
3.1.4 Protect user authentication information for user-initiated
electronic access applicable to Section 3.1.3 while in transit
between the Cyber System(s) outside the asset containing
low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS and
• the authentication system used to meet Section 3.1.3,
or
• the asset containing low impact BCS or SCI that
supports a low impact BCS;
3.1.5 Include one or more method(s) for determining vendor
electronic access, where vendor electronic access is
permitted; and
3.1.6 Include one or more method(s) for disabling vendor
electronic access, where vendor electronic access is
permitted.
3.2 For each asset containing low impact BCS identified pursuant to CIP-002 and
for SCI that supports a low impact BCS, if any, the Responsible Entity shall
implement one or more control(s) that authenticate all Dial-up Connectivity,
if any, that provides access to low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low
impact BCS, per system capability.
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more
Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), either by asset or group of assets, which
shall include:
4.1 Identification, classification, and response to Cyber Security Incidents;
4.2 Determination of whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and subsequent notification to the
Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC), unless
prohibited by law;
4.3 Identification of the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security Incident
response by groups or individuals;
4.4 Incident handling for Cyber Security Incidents;
4.5 Testing the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) at least once every 36
calendar months by: (1) responding to an actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; (2) using a drill or tabletop exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Page 17 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Incident; or (3) using an operational exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; and
4.6 Updating the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), if needed, within 180
calendar days after completion of a Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
test or actual Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
Section 5. TCA and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation: Each Responsible Entity
shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or more plan(s)
to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of the introduction of malicious code
to low impact BCS, through the use of TCA or Removable Media. The plan(s) shall
include:
5.1 For TCA managed by the Responsible Entity, if any, the use of one or a
combination of the following in an ongoing or on-demand manner (per TCA
capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
5.2 For TCA managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity, if any:
5.2.1 Use one or a combination of the following prior to connecting (per
TCA capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
• Review of other method(s) to mitigate the risk of introduction
of malicious code.
5.2.2 For any method used pursuant to 5.2.1, Responsible Entities shall
determine whether any additional mitigation actions are necessary
and implement such actions prior to connecting the TCA.
5.3 For Removable Media, the use of each of the following:
5.3.1 Method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media using a
Cyber Asset or VCA other than a BCS or SCI that supports a low impact
BCS; and
5.3.2 Mitigation of the threat of detected malicious code on the Removable
Media prior to connecting Removable Media to a low impact BCS or
SCI that supports a low impact BCS.
Page 18 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Cyber Security Plan(s)
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: An example of evidence for Section 1 may include, but is
not limited to, documentation that the reinforcement of cyber security practices
occurred at least once every 15 calendar months. The evidence could be
documentation through one or more of the following methods:
• Direct communications (for example, e-mails, memos, or computer-based
training);
• Indirect communications (for example, posters, intranet, or brochures); or
• Management support and reinforcement (for example, presentations or
meetings).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 2 may include, but are
not limited to:
• Documentation of the selected access control(s) (e.g., card key, locks, perimeter
controls), monitoring controls (e.g., alarm systems, human observation), or other
operational, procedural, or technical physical security controls that control
physical access to both:
a. The asset, if any, or the locations of the low impact BCS within the asset; and
b. The Cyber System(s) specified by the Responsible Entity that provide(s)
electronic access controls implemented for Attachment 1, Section 3.1.1, if
any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 3 may include, but are
not limited to:
1. For Section 3.1.1, documentation showing the permittance of only inbound and
outbound electronic access, where electronic access meets Section 3.1, Parts (i),
(ii), and (iii), that the Responsible Entity deems necessary, such as:
• Representative diagrams that illustrate control of inbound and outbound
communication(s) between the low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low
impact BCS and a Cyber System outside the asset containing low impact
BCS.
• Lists of implemented electronic access controls (e.g., access control lists
restricting IP addresses, ports, or services; implementing unidirectional
gateways); or
• Original equipment manufacturer (OEM) specification sheets that provide
rationale around necessary electronic access.
Page 19 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
2. For Section 3.1.2, documentation showing the ability to detect known or
suspected malicious communications for both inbound and outbound electronic
access, where electronic access meets Section 3.1, Parts (i), (ii), and (iii), such as:
• Anti-malware technologies;
• Intrusion detection system (IDS)/intrusion prevention system (IPS);
• Monitor or alert for changes to communication baselines;
• Logging and alerting configuration for security incident and event
management (SIEM) systems or other event correlation systems;
• Automated or manual log reviews;
• Alerting; or
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
3. For Section 3.1.3, documentation showing the ability to authenticate each user
prior to permitting access to a network(s) containing low impact BCS or SCI
that supports a low impact BCS through which user-initiated electronic access
applicable to Section 3.1 is subsequently permitted, such as:
• Authentication mechanism(s) including, but not limited to:
■ Utilization of public key infrastructure (PKI), lightweight directory
access protocol (LDAP), remote authentication dial-in user service
(RADIUS), and/or similar implemented solutions; or
■ Enforcement of multi-factor authentication (MFA).
• Virtual private network (VPN) configuration(s) with logs demonstrating
enforcement of username and password parameters;
• Terminal server, jump server, access control device, or an Intermediate
System also used with a High or Medium Impact BCS; or
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
4. For Section 3.1.4, documentation showing the ability to protect user
authentication information for user-initiated electronic access applicable to
Section 3.1.3 while in transit between the Cyber System outside the asset
containing low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS and
• The authentication system used to meet Section 3.1.3, or
• The asset containing low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS,
such as protection mechanism(s) including, but not limited to:
• Implementation of an encrypted protocol or service (hypertext transfer
protocol secure (HTTPS), secure shell (SSH), etc.);
• Implementation of an IPsec or secure sockets layer (SSL) VPN; or
Page 20 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
5. For Section 3.1.5 documentation showing one or more methods for determining
vendor electronic access, where vendor electronic access is permitted and
electronic access meets Section 3.1, Parts (i), (ii), and (iii), such as:
• Steps to preauthorize access;
• Alerts generated by vendor log on;
• Session monitoring;
• Security information management logging alerts;
• Time-of-need session initiation;
• Session recording;
• System logs; or
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
6. For Section 3.1.6, documentation showing one or more methods for disabling
vendor electronic access, where vendor electronic access is permitted and
electronic access meets Section 3.1, Parts (i), (ii), and (iii), such as:
• Disabling vendor electronic access user or system accounts;
• Disabling inbound and/or outbound hardware or software ports, services,
or access permissions on applications, firewall, IDS/IPS, router, switch,
VPN, remote desktop, remote control, or other hardware or software
used for providing vendor electronic access;
• Disabling communications protocols (such as IP) used for systems which
establish and/or maintain vendor electronic access;
• Removing physical layer connectivity (e.g., disconnect an Ethernet cable,
power down equipment);
• Administrative control documentation listing the methods, steps, or
systems used to disable vendor electronic access; or
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
7. For Section 3.2, documentation of authentication for Dial-up Connectivity (e.g.,
dial out only to a preprogrammed number to deliver data, dial-back modems,
modems that must be remotely controlled by the control center or control room,
or access control on the BCS).
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: An example of evidence for Section 4 may include,
but is not limited to, dated documentation, such as policies, procedures, or process
documents of one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) developed
either by asset or group of assets that include the following processes:
Page 21 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
1. to identify, classify, and respond to Cyber Security Incidents; to determine
whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident and for notifying the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(E-ISAC);
2. to identify and document the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security
Incident response by groups or individuals (e.g., initiating, documenting,
monitoring, reporting, etc.);
3. for incident handling of a Cyber Security Incident (e.g., containment, eradication,
or recovery/incident resolution);
4. for testing the plan(s) along with the dated documentation that a test has been
completed at least once every 36 calendar months; and
5. to update, as needed, Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) within 180
calendar days after completion of a test or actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident.
Section 5. TCA and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation:
1. Examples of evidence for Section 5.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern
updates, application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication,
or other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a TCA does
not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the introduction of
malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the vendor or
Responsible Entity that identifies that the TCA does not have the capability.
2. Examples of evidence for Section 5.2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or
procedures that document a review of the installed antivirus update level;
memoranda, electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from
the party other than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update
process, the use of application whitelisting, use of system hardening performed
by the party other than the Responsible Entity; evidence from change
management systems, electronic mail or contracts that identifies the
Responsible Entity’s acceptance that the practices of the party other than the
Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other method(s) to
mitigate malicious code for TCA managed by a party other than the Responsible
Entity. If a TCA does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the
introduction of malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the
Responsible Entity or the party other than the Responsible Entity that identifies
that the TCA does not have the capability.
Page 22 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Examples of evidence for Attachment 1, Section 5.2.2 may include, but are not
limited to, documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or
contracts that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigation is
necessary and has been implemented prior to connecting the TCA managed by a
party other than the Responsible Entity.
3. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to detect malicious code such as
results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on-demand
scanning. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.2 may include, but are not limited
to, documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating the threat of
detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the method(s)
used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and the
mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or documented
confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed to be free of
malicious code.
Page 23 of 23
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-003-11.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-008-7.pdf ---
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
2. Number: CIP-008-7
3. Purpose: To mitigate the risk to the reliable operation of the BES as the result of a
Cyber Security Incident by specifying incident response requirements.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein,
the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the Bulk
Electric System (BES):
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
Page 1 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-008-7:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
Page 2 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP.
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems (BES) categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to
define the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan”.
Page 3 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall document one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) that collectively include each
of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications. [Violation
Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M1. Evidence must include each of the documented plan(s) that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in
CIP-008-7 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications.
CIP-008-7 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS and their associated One or more processes to identify, Examples of evidence may include, but are
Electronic Access Control and Monitoring classify, and respond to Cyber Security not limited to, dated documentation of
Systems (EACMS) Incidents. Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
that include the process(es) to identify,
Medium impact BCS and their associated
classify, and respond to Cyber Security
EACMS
Incidents.
Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI)
supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
1.2 High impact BCS and their associated One or more processes: Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS not limited to, dated documentation of
1.2.1 That include criteria to evaluate and
Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
Medium impact BCS and their associated define attempts to compromise;
that provide guidance or thresholds for
EACMS
1.2.2 To determine if an identified Cyber
determining which Cyber Security
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this Security Incident is:
Incidents are also Reportable Cyber
Part
• A Reportable Cyber Security
Security Incidents or a Cyber Security
Incident; or
Incident that is determined to be an
• An attempt to compromise, as attempt to compromise a system
determined by applying the identified in the Applicable Systems
criteria from Part 1.2.1, one or column including justification for attempt
more systems identified in the determination criteria and documented
Applicable Systems column for processes for notification.
this Part; and
1.2.3 To provide notification per
Requirement R4.
Page 4 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-7 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 High impact BCS and their associated The roles and responsibilities of Cyber Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS Security Incident response groups or not limited to, dated Cyber Security
individuals. Incident response process(es) or
Medium impact BCS and their associated
procedure(s) that define roles and
EACMS
responsibilities (e.g., monitoring,
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
reporting, initiating, documenting, etc.) of
Part
Cyber Security Incident response groups
or individuals.
1.4 High impact BCS and their associated Incident handling procedures for Cyber Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS Security Incidents. not limited to, dated Cyber Security
Incident response process(es) or
Medium impact BCS and their associated
procedure(s) that address incident
EACMS
handling (e.g., containment, eradication,
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
recovery/incident resolution).
Part
Page 5 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement each of its documented Cyber Security Incident response plans to collectively
include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Implementation and Testing. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Real-Time Operations].
M2. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates implementation of each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing.
CIP-008-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated Test each Cyber Security Incident response Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS plan(s) at least once every 15 calendar not limited to, dated evidence of a lessons-
months: learned report that includes a summary of
Medium impact BCS and their associated
the test or a compilation of notes, logs, and
EACMS • By responding to an actual
communication resulting from the test.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this Reportable Cyber Security Incident;
Types of exercises may include discussion
Part • With a paper drill or tabletop exercise
or operations based exercises.
of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; or
• With an operational exercise of a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
2.2 High impact BCS and their associated Use the Cyber Security Incident response Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS plan(s) under Requirement R1 when not limited to, incident reports, logs, and
responding to a Reportable Cyber Security notes that were kept during the incident
Medium impact BCS and their associated
Incident, responding to a Cyber Security response process, and follow-up
EACMS
Incident that attempted to compromise a documentation that describes deviations
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
system identified in the Applicable Systems taken from the plan during the incident
Part
column for this Part, or performing an response or exercise.
exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident. Document deviations from the
plan(s) taken during the response to the
incident or exercise.
Page 6 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High impact BCS and their associated Retain records related to Reportable Cyber Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS Security Incidents and Cyber Security not limited to, dated documentation, such
Incidents that attempted to compromise a as security logs, police reports, emails,
Medium impact BCS and their associated
system identified in the Applicable Systems response forms or checklists, forensic
EACMS
column for this Part as per the Cyber analysis results, restoration records, and
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Security Incident response plan(s) under post-incident review notes related to
Part
Requirement R1. Reportable Cyber Security Incidents and a
Cyber Security Incident that is determined
to be an attempt to compromise a system
identified in the Applicable Systems
column.
Page 7 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall maintain each of its Cyber Security Incident response plans according to each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Review, Update, and
Communication. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Assessment].
M3. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates maintenance of each Cyber
Security Incident response plan according to the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R3 – Cyber Security
Incident Response Plan Review, Update, and Communication.
CIP-008-7 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Review, Update, and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High impact BCS and their associated No later than 90 calendar days after Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS completion of a Cyber Security Incident not limited to, all of the following:
response plan(s) test or actual Reportable
Medium impact BCS and their associated 1. Dated documentation of post
Cyber Security Incident response:
EACMS incident(s) review meeting notes or
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
3.1.1. Document any lessons learned or follow-up report showing lessons
document the absence of any learned associated with the Cyber
Part
lessons learned; Security Incident response plan(s) test
3.1.2. Update the Cyber Security or actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident response or dated
Incident response plan based on
documentation stating there were no
any documented lessons learned
lessons learned;
associated with the plan; and
3.1.3. Notify each person or group with a
2. Dated and revised Cyber Security
defined role in the Cyber Security Incident response plan showing any
Incident response plan of the changes based on the lessons
updates to the Cyber Security learned; and
Incident response plan based on 3. Evidence of plan update distribution
any documented lessons learned. including, but not limited to:
• Emails;
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
3.2 High impact BCS and their associated No later than 60 calendar days after a Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS change to the roles or responsibilities, not limited to:
Cyber Security Incident response groups or
1. Dated and revised Cyber Security
individuals, or technology that the
Incident response plan with changes
Page 8 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-7 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Review, Update, and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
Medium impact BCS and their associated Responsible Entity determines would to the roles or responsibilities,
EACMS impact the ability to execute the plan: responders or technology; and
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this 3.2.1. Update the Cyber Security 2. Evidence of plan update distribution
Part Incident response plan(s); and including, but not limited to:
3.2.2. Notify each person or group with a • Emails;
defined role in the Cyber Security
• USPS or other mail service;
Incident response plan of the
• Electronic distribution system; or
updates.
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 9 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R4. Each Responsible Entity shall notify the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC) and, if subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States, the United States Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), or their
successors, of a Reportable Cyber Security Incident and a Cyber Security Incident that was an attempt to compromise, as
determined by applying the criteria from Requirement R1, Part 1.2.1, a system identified in the Applicable Systems column,
unless prohibited by law, in accordance with each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R4 – Notifications
and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Assessment].
M4. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates notification of each determined
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and a Cyber Security Incident that was an attempt to compromise a system identified in
the Applicable Systems column according to the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R4 – Notifications and
Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents.
CIP-008-7 Table R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.1 High impact BCS and their associated Initial notifications and updates shall Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS include the following attributes, at a not limited to, dated documentation of
minimum, to the extent known: initial notifications and updates to the E-
Medium impact BCS and their associated
ISAC and CISA, or their successors.
EACMS 4.1.1 The functional impact;
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this 4.1.2 The attack vector used; and
Part
4.1.3 The level of intrusion that was
achieved or attempted.
4.2 High impact BCS and their associated After the Responsible Entity’s Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS determination made pursuant to not limited to, dated documentation of
documented process(es) in Requirement notices to the E-ISAC and CISA, or their
Medium impact BCS and their associated
R1, Part 1.2, provide initial notification successors.
EACMS
within the following timelines:
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
• One hour after the determination of
Part
a Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
• By the end of the next calendar day
after determination that a Cyber
Security Incident was an attempt to
compromise a system identified in
the Applicable Systems column for
this Part.
Page 10 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-7 Table R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.3 High impact BCS and their associated Provide updates, if any, within seven Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS calendar days of determination of new or not limited to, dated documentation of
changed attribute information required in submissions to the E-ISAC and CISA, or
Medium impact BCS and their associated
Part 4.1. their successors.
EACMS
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
Page 11 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
The Regional Entity shall serve as the Compliance Enforcement Authority (“CEA”) unless
the applicable entity is owned, operated, or controlled by the Regional Entity. In such
cases the ERO or a Regional Entity approved by FERC or other applicable governmental
authority shall serve as the CEA.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required
to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence
retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may
ask an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time
period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as
part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard for
three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the
non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time specified
above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent
audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement
Program” refers to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated
Reliability Standard.
Page 12 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 N/A N/A The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
include the roles and develop a Cyber Security
responsibilities of Cyber Incident response plan with
Security Incident response one or more processes to
groups or individuals. (Part 1.3) identify, classify, and respond
to Cyber Security Incidents.
OR
(Part 1.1)
The Responsible Entity did not
OR
include incident handling
procedures for Cyber Security The Responsible Entity’s plan
Incidents. (Part 1.4) did not include one or more
processes to identify
OR
Reportable Cyber Security
The Responsible Entity’s plan
Incidents or a Cyber Security
did not include one or more
Incident that was an attempt to
processes to provide
compromise, as determined by
notification per Requirement
applying the criteria from Part
R4. (Part 1.2)
1.2.1, a system identified in the
OR
Applicable Systems column for
The Responsible Entity’s plan Part 1.2. (Part 1.2)
did not include one or more
processes that include criteria
to evaluate and define
attempts to compromise. (Part
1.2)
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
test the Cyber Security Incident test the Cyber Security Incident test the Cyber Security Incident test the Cyber Security Incident
response plan(s) within 15 response plan(s) within 16 response plan(s) within 17 response plan(s) within 18
calendar months, not calendar months, not calendar months, not calendar months between tests
exceeding 16 calendar months exceeding 17 calendar months exceeding 18 calendar months of the plan(s). (Part 2.1)
between tests of the plan(s). between tests of the plan(s). between tests of the plan(s).
OR
(Par 2.1) (Part 2.1) (Part 2.1)
The Responsible Entity did not
OR
retain relevant records related
Page 13 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity did not to Reportable Cyber Security
document deviations, if any, Incidents or Cyber Security
from the plan during a test or Incidents that were an attempt
when a Reportable Cyber to compromise a system
Security Incident or a Cyber identified in the Applicable
Security Incident that was an Systems column for Part 2.3.
attempt to compromise a (Part 2.3)
system identified in the
Applicable Systems column for
Part 2.2 occurs. (Part 2.2)
R3 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity neither The Responsible Entity neither
notify each person or group update the Cyber Security documented lessons learned documented lessons learned
with a defined role in the Cyber Incident response plan based nor documented the absence nor documented the absence
Security Incident response plan on any documented lessons of any lessons learned within of any lessons learned within
of updates to the Cyber learned within 90 and less than 90 and less than 120 calendar 120 calendar days of a test or
Security Incident response plan 120 calendar days of a test or days of a test or actual incident actual incident response to a
within greater than 90 but less actual incident response to a response to a Reportable Cyber Reportable Cyber Security
than 120 calendar days of a Reportable Cyber Security Security Incident. (Part 3.1.1) Incident. (Part 3.1.1)
test or actual incident response Incident. (Part 3.1.2)
OR
to a Reportable Cyber Security
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
Incident. (Part 3.1.3)
The Responsible Entity did not update the Cyber Security
notify each person or group Incident response plan based
with a defined role in the Cyber on any documented lessons
Security Incident response plan learned within 120 calendar
of updates to the Cyber days of a test or actual incident
Security Incident response plan response to a Reportable Cyber
within 120 calendar days of a Security Incident. (Part 3.1.2)
test or actual incident response
OR
to a Reportable Cyber Security
The Responsible Entity did not
Incident. (Part 3.1.3)
update the Cyber Security
OR
Incident response plan(s) or
The Responsible Entity did not notified each person or group
update the Cyber Security with a defined role within 90
Page 14 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Incident response plan(s) or calendar days of any of the
notified each person or group following changes that the
with a defined role within 60 responsible entity determines
and less than 90 calendar days would impact the ability to
of any of the following changes execute the plan:
that the responsible entity
• Roles or responsibilities, or
determines would impact the
• Cyber Security Incident
ability to execute the plan:
response groups or
• Roles or responsibilities, or individuals, or
• Technology changes. (Part
• Cyber Security Incident
3.2)
response groups or
individuals, or
• Technology changes. (Part
3.2)
R4 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
notify or update E-ISAC or CISA, notify E-ISAC or CISA, or their notify or update E-ISAC or CISA, notify E-ISAC and CISA, or their
or their successors, within the successors, of a Cyber Security or their successors, within the successors, of a Reportable
timelines pursuant to Part 4.2. Incident that was an attempt to timelines pursuant to Part 4.2. Cyber Security Incident.
(Part 4.2) compromise, as determined by (Part 4.2) (Requirement R4)
applying the criteria from
OR OR
Requirement R1, Part 1.2.1, a
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
system identified in the
report on one or more of the notify E-ISAC or CISA, or their
Applicable Systems column.
attributes within 7 days after successors, of a Reportable
(Requirement R4)
determination of the Cyber Security Incident.
attribute(s) not reported (Requirement R4)
pursuant to Part 4.1. (Part 4.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
report on one or more of the
attributes after determination
pursuant to Part 4.1. (Part 4.1)
Page 15 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-008-7 Technical Rationale
Page 16 of 17
CIP-008-7 - Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
center.”
Modifications to clarify the requirements and
to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
2 9/30/09
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
Responsible Entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
Updated version number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or system
3
from service in order to perform testing, in
response to FERC order issued September 30,
2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
Modified to add specific criteria for Critical
4 12/30/10 Update
Asset identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
Modified to coordinate with
other CIP standards and to
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
revise format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-008-5.
CIP-008-5 Requirement R2,
FERC Letter Order issued approving VRFs and VSL table under Severe,
5 7/9/14
VSLs revisions to certain CIP standards. changed from 19 to 18
calendar months.
Modified to address
6 2/7/2019 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. directives in FERC Order No.
848
Virtualization Modifications
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees
by Project 2016-02
Page 17 of 17
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-008-7.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-012-2.pdf ---
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
2. Number: CIP-012-2
3. Purpose: To protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of Real-time
Assessment and Real-time monitoring data transmitted between Control Centers.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: The requirements in this standard apply to the following
functional entities, referred to as “Responsible Entities,” that own or operate a
Control Center.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Generator Operator
4.1.3. Generator Owner
4.1.4. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.5. Transmission Operator
4.1.6. Transmission Owner
4.2. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Reliability Standard CIP-012-2:
4.2.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.2. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R.
Section 73.54.
4.2.3. A Control Center that transmits to another Control Center Real-time
Assessment or Real-time monitoring data pertaining only to the generation
resource or Transmission station or substation co-located with the
transmitting Control Center.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for CIP-012-2.
Page 1 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. The Responsible Entity shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or
more documented plan(s) to mitigate the risks posed by unauthorized disclosure,
unauthorized modification, and loss of availability, of data used in Real-time Assessment and
Real-time monitoring while such data is being transmitted between any applicable Control
Centers. The Responsible Entity is not required to include oral communications in its plan.
The plan shall include: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations
Planning]Identification of method(s) used to mitigate the risk(s) posed by unauthorized
disclosure and unauthorized modification of data used in Real-time Assessment and Real-
time monitoring while such data is being transmitted between Control Centers;
1.1. Identification of method(s) used to mitigate the risk(s) posed by unauthorized
disclosure and unauthorized modification of data used in Real-time Assessment and
Real-time monitoring while such data is being transmitted between Control Centers;
1.2. Identification of method(s) used to mitigate the risk(s) posed by the loss of the
ability to communicate Real-time Assessment and Real-time monitoring data
between Control Centers;
1.3. Identification of method(s) used to initiate the recovery of communication links used
to transmit Real-time Assessment and Real-time monitoring data between Control
Centers;
1.4. Identification of where the Responsible Entity implemented method(s)as required
in Parts 1.1 and 1.2; and
1.5. If the Control Centers are owned or operated by different Responsible Entities,
identification of the responsibilities of each Responsible Entity for implementing
method(s) as required in Parts 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3.
M1. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, documented plan(s) that meet the
mitigation objective of Requirement R1 and documentation demonstrating the
implementation of the plan(s). Examples of methods identified in the plan(s) may include,
but are not limited to, one or more of the following for each Part:
Part 1.1
• Methods of mitigation used to protect against the unauthorized disclosure and
unauthorized modification of the data (e.g., data masking, encryption/decryption)
while such data is being transmitted between Control Centers
• Physical access restrictions to unencrypted portions of the network
Part 1.2
• Identification of alternative communication paths or methods between Control Centers
• Procedures explaining the use of alternative systems or methods for providing for the
availability of the data
• Service level agreements with carriers containing high availability provisions
Page 2 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
• Availability or uptime reports for equipment supporting the transmission of Real-time
Assessment and Real-time monitoring data
Part 1.3
• Contract, memorandum of understanding, meeting minutes, agreement or other
information outlining the methods used for recovery
• Methods for the recovery of links such as standard operating procedures, applicable
sections of CIP-009 recovery plan(s), or similar technical recovery plans
• Documentation of the process to restore assets and systems that provide
communications
• Process or procedure to contact a communications link vendor to initiate and or verify
restoration of service
Part 1.4
• Descriptions or logical diagrams indicating where the implemented methods reside
• Identification of points within the infrastructure where the implemented methods
reside
• Third party Agreements detailing where the methods are implemented if such methods
are implemented by the third party
Part 1.5
• Contract, memorandum of understanding, meeting minutes, agreement, or other
documentation outlining the responsibilities of each entity
Page 3 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC, the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring and/or
enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in their
respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period of
time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For
instances where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the
time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show
that it was compliant for the full-time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• The Responsible Entities shall keep data or evidence of each Requirement in this
Reliability Standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time
specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
Page 4 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
documented its plan(s), documented its plan(s), failed to document its
but failed to include one but failed to include two plan(s) for Requirement
of the applicable Parts of of the applicable Parts of R1;
the plan as specified in the plan as specified in
OR
Requirement R1. Requirement R1.
The Responsible Entity
failed to implement three
or more Parts of its plan(s)
for Requirement R1,
except under CIP
Exceptional Circumstances.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan.
• Technical Rationale for CIP-012-2.
Page 5 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
Version History
Version Date Action Change
Tracking
1 Respond to FERC Order No. 822 New
1 August 16, 2018 Adopted by NERC Board of Trustees
1 January 23, 2020 FERC Order issued approving CIP-012-
1Docket No. RM18-20-000
Revised under
2 December 12, Adopted by NERC Board of Trustees
Project 2020-04
2023
2 May 23, 2024 FERC Order issued approving CIP-012-2
Docket No. RD24-3-000
Page 6 of 6
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-012-2.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-010-4.pdf ---
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability
Assessments
2. Number: CIP-010-4
3. Purpose: To prevent and detect unauthorized changes to BES Cyber Systems by
specifying configuration change management and vulnerability assessment
requirements in support of protecting BES Cyber Systems from compromise that could
lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
Page 1 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-010-4:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters.
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03.
6. Background: Standard CIP-010 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to
cyber security, which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber
Systems and require a minimum level of organizational, operational and procedural
controls to mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements.
An entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes,
but it must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident
response plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an
approach involving multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans, and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the
standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training
program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be
referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any
additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Page 3 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented processes.
These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the BES. A
review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability standards for UFLS
program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of 300 MW
represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of
systems to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this
concept from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk
Management Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately
based on impact and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used
in the applicability column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized
as medium impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
• Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced
high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples
may include, but are not limited to, firewalls, authentication servers, and log
monitoring and alerting systems.
Page 4 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
• Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access
Control System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or
medium impact BES Cyber System with External Routable Connectivity.
• Protected Cyber Assets (PCA) – Applies to each Protected Cyber Asset
associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact
BES Cyber System.
Page 5 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Develop a baseline configuration, Examples of evidence may include, but are
associated: individually or by group, which shall include not limited to:
1. EACMS; the following items: • A spreadsheet identifying the required
1.1.1. Operating system(s) (including items of the baseline configuration for
2. PACS; and
version) or firmware where no each Cyber Asset, individually or by
3. PCA
independent operating system group; or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
exists;
their associated: • A record in an asset management
1.1.2. Any commercially available or system that identifies the required
1. EACMS;
open-source application software items of the baseline configuration for
2. PACS; and
(including version) intentionally each Cyber Asset, individually or by
3. PCA
installed; group.
1.1.3. Any custom software installed;
1.1.4. Any logical network accessible
ports; and
1.1.5. Any security patches applied.
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Authorize and document changes that Examples of evidence may include, but are
associated: deviate from the existing baseline not limited to:
1. EACMS; configuration. • A change request record and
2. PACS; and associated electronic authorization
3. PCA (performed by the individual or group
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and with the authority to authorize the
their associated: change) in a change management
Page 6 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1. EACMS; system for each change; or
2. PACS; and • Documentation that the change was
3. PCA performed in accordance with the
requirement.
1.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their For a change that deviates from the An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: existing baseline configuration, update the not limited to, updated baseline
baseline configuration as necessary within documentation with a date that is within
1. EACMS;
30 calendar days of completing the change. 30 calendar days of the date of the
2. PACS; and
completion of the change.
3. PCA
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their For a change that deviates from the An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: existing baseline configuration: not limited to, a list of cyber security
1. EACMS; 1.4.1. Prior to the change, determine controls verified or tested along with the
2. PACS; and required cyber security controls in dated test results.
3. PCA CIP-005 and CIP-007 that could be
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and impacted by the change;
their associated: 1.4.2. Following the change, verify that
required cyber security controls
1. EACMS;
determined in 1.4.1 are not
2. PACS; and
adversely affected; and
3. PCA
1.4.3. Document the results of the
verification.
Where technically feasible, for each change
1.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems An example of evidence may include, but is
that deviates from the existing baseline
not limited to, a list of cyber security
configuration: controls tested along with successful test
1.5.1. Prior to implementing any change results and a list of differences between
in the production environment, the production and test environments with
Page 7 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
test the changes in a test descriptions of how any differences were
environment or test the changes in accounted for, including the date of the
a production environment where test.
the test is performed in a manner
that minimizes adverse effects, that
models the baseline configuration
to ensure that required cyber
security controls in CIP-005 and
CIP-007 are not adversely affected;
and
1.5.2. Document the results of the testing
and, if a test environment was
used, the differences between the
test environment and the
production environment, including
a description of the measures used
to account for any differences in
operation between the test and
production environments.
1.6 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Prior to a change that deviates from the An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: existing baseline configuration associated not limited to a change request record that
with baseline items in Parts 1.1.1, 1.1.2, demonstrates the verification of identity of
1. EACMS; and
and 1.1.5, and when the method to do so is the software source and integrity of the
2. PACS
available to the Responsible Entity from the software was performed prior to the
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
software source: baseline change or a process which
their associated:
1.6.1. Verify the identity of the software documents the mechanisms in place that
1. EACMS; and
would automatically ensure the identity of
source; and
2. PACS
the software source and integrity of the
1.6.2. Verify the integrity of the software
Note: Implementation does not require
software.
obtained from the software source.
the Responsible Entity to renegotiate or
abrogate existing contracts (including
amendments to master agreements and
purchase orders). Additionally, the
Page 8 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
following issues are beyond the scope of
Part 1.6: (1) the actual terms and
conditions of a procurement contract; and
(2) vendor performance and adherence to
a contract.
Page 9 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-4 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-4 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-4 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Monitor at least once every 35 calendar An example of evidence may include, but
associated: days for changes to the baseline is not limited to, logs from a system that is
1. EACMS; and configuration (as described in Requirement monitoring the configuration along with
R1, Part 1.1). Document and investigate records of investigation for any
2. PCA
detected unauthorized changes. unauthorized changes that were detected.
Page 10 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-3 Table R3– Vulnerability Assessments. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long-term Planning and Operations Planning]
M3. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-3 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-4 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their At least once every 15 calendar months, Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: conduct a paper or active vulnerability are not limited to:
1. EACMS; assessment.
• A document listing the date of the
2. PACS; and
assessment (performed at least once
3. PCA
every 15 calendar months), the
controls assessed for each BES Cyber
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
System along with the method of
their associated:
assessment; or
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and • A document listing the date of the
assessment and the output of any
3. PCA
tools used to perform the
assessment.
Page 11 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems Where technically feasible, at least once An example of evidence may include, but
every 36 calendar months: is not limited to, a document listing the
date of the assessment (performed at
3.2.1 Perform an active vulnerability
least once every 36 calendar months), the
assessment in a test environment,
output of the tools used to perform the
or perform an active vulnerability
assessment, and a list of differences
assessment in a production
between the production and test
environment where the test is
environments with descriptions of how
performed in a manner that
any differences were accounted for in
minimizes adverse effects, that
conducting the assessment.
models the baseline configuration
of the BES Cyber System in a
production environment; and
3.2.2 Document the results of the
testing and, if a test environment
was used, the differences
between the test environment
and the production environment,
including a description of the
measures used to account for any
differences in operation between
the test and production
environments.
Page 12 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Prior to adding a new applicable Cyber An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Asset to a production environment, is not limited to, a document listing the
1. EACMS; and perform an active vulnerability date of the assessment (performed prior
assessment of the new Cyber Asset, to the commissioning of the new Cyber
2. PCA
except for CIP Exceptional Circumstances Asset) and the output of any tools used to
and like replacements of the same type of perform the assessment.
Cyber Asset with a baseline configuration
that models an existing baseline
configuration of the previous or other
existing Cyber Asset.
3.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Document the results of the assessments An example of evidence may include, but
associated: conducted according to Parts 3.1, 3.2, and is not limited to, a document listing the
1. EACMS; 3.3 and the action plan to remediate or results or the review or assessment, a list
mitigate vulnerabilities identified in the of action items, documented proposed
2. PACS; and
assessments including the planned date of dates of completion for the action plan,
3. PCA
completing the action plan and the and records of the status of the action
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and execution status of any remediation or items (such as minutes of a status
their associated: mitigation action items. meeting, updates in a work order system,
1. EACMS; or a spreadsheet tracking the action
2. PACS; and items).
3. PCA
Page 13 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R4. Each Responsible Entity, for its high impact and medium impact BES Cyber Systems and associated Protected Cyber Assets,
shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or more documented plan(s) for Transient Cyber Assets
and Removable Media that include the sections in Attachment 1. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Long-term
Planning and Operations Planning]
M4. Evidence shall include each of the documented plan(s) for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media that collectively
include each of the applicable sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation of plan(s)
for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media. Additional examples of evidence per section are located in Attachment
2. If a Responsible Entity does not use Transient Cyber Asset(s) or Removable Media, examples of evidence include, but are
not limited to, a statement, policy, or other document that states the Responsible Entity does not use Transient Cyber
Asset(s) or Removable Media.
Page 14 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated
by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of
monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable
Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to
provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-time period
since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 15 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has not
documented and implemented documented and implemented documented and implemented documented or implemented
a configuration change a configuration change a configuration change any configuration change
management process(es) that management process(es) that management process(es) that management process(es). (R1)
includes only four of the includes only three of the includes only two of the
OR
required baseline items listed required baseline items listed required baseline items listed
The Responsible Entity has
in 1.1.1 through 1.1.5. (1.1) in 1.1.1 through 1.1.5. (1.1) in 1.1.1 through 1.1.5. (1.1)
documented and implemented
OR
a configuration change
The Responsible Entity has a management process(es) that
process as specified in Part 1.6 includes only one of the
to verify the identity of the required baseline items listed
software source (1.6.1) but in 1.1.1 through 1.1.5. (1.1)
does not have a process as
OR
specified in Part 1.6 to verify
The Responsible Entity does
the integrity of the software
not have a process(es) that
provided by the software
requires authorization and
source when the method to do
documentation of changes
so is available to the
that deviate from the existing
Responsible Entity from the
baseline configuration. (1.2)
software source. (1.6.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process(es) to
update baseline configurations
within 30 calendar days of
completing a change(s) that
deviates from the existing
baseline configuration.(1.3)
OR
Page 16 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process(es) to
determine required security
controls in CIP-005 and CIP-
007 that could be impacted by
a change(s) that deviates from
the existing baseline
configuration. (1.4.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity has a
process(es) to determine
required security controls in
CIP-005 and CIP-007 that could
be impacted by a change(s)
that deviates from the existing
baseline configuration but did
not verify and document that
the required controls were not
adversely affected following
the change. (1.4.2 & 1.4.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process for testing
changes in an environment
that models the baseline
configuration prior to
implementing a change that
deviates from baseline
configuration. (1.5.1)
OR
Page 17 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process to
document the test results and,
if using a test environment,
document the differences
between the test and
production environments.
(1.5.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process as specified
in Part 1.6 to verify the identity
of the software source and the
integrity of the software
provided by the software
source when the method to do
so is available to the
Responsible Entity from the
software source. (1.6)
R2. N/A N/A N/A The Responsible Entity has not
documented or implemented a
process(es) to monitor for,
investigate, and document
detected unauthorized
changes to the baseline at
least once every 35 calendar
days. (2.1)
R3. The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has not
implemented one or more implemented one or more implemented one or more implemented any vulnerability
documented vulnerability documented vulnerability documented vulnerability assessment processes for one
assessment processes for each assessment processes for each assessment processes for each
Page 18 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
of its applicable BES Cyber of its applicable BES Cyber of its applicable BES Cyber of its applicable BES Cyber
Systems, but has performed a Systems, but has performed a Systems, but has performed a Systems. (R3)
vulnerability assessment more vulnerability assessment more vulnerability assessment more
OR
than 15 months, but less than than 18 months, but less than than 21 months, but less than
The Responsible Entity has
18 months, since the last 21 months, since the last 24 months, since the last
implemented one or more
assessment on one of its assessment on one of its assessment on one of its
documented vulnerability
applicable BES Cyber Systems. applicable BES Cyber Systems. applicable BES Cyber Systems.
assessment processes for each
(3.1) (3.1) (3.1)
of its applicable BES Cyber
OR OR OR
Systems, but has performed a
The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has vulnerability assessment more
implemented one or more implemented one or more implemented one or more than 24 months since the last
documented active documented active documented active assessment on one of its
vulnerability assessment vulnerability assessment vulnerability assessment applicable BES Cyber Systems.
processes for Applicable processes for Applicable processes for Applicable (3.1)
Systems, but has performed an Systems, but has performed an Systems, but has performed an
OR
active vulnerability assessment active vulnerability assessment active vulnerability assessment
The Responsible Entity has
more than 36 months, but less more than 39 months, but less more than 42 months, but less
implemented one or more
than 39 months, since the last than 42 months, since the last than 45 months, since the last
documented active
active assessment on one of its active assessment on one of its active assessment on one of its
vulnerability assessment
applicable BES Cyber Systems. applicable BES Cyber Systems. applicable BES Cyber Systems.
processes for Applicable
(3.2) (3.2) (3.2)
Systems, but has performed an
active vulnerability assessment
more than 45 months since the
last active assessment on one
of its applicable BES Cyber
Systems.(3.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
implemented and
documented one or more
vulnerability assessment
Page 19 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
processes for each of its
applicable BES Cyber Systems,
but did not perform the active
vulnerability assessment in a
manner that models an
existing baseline configuration
of its applicable BES Cyber
Systems. (3.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
implemented one or more
documented vulnerability
assessment processes for each
of its applicable BES Cyber
Systems, but has not
documented the results of the
vulnerability assessments, the
action plans to remediate or
mitigate vulnerabilities
identified in the assessments,
the planned date of
completion of the action plan,
and the execution status of the
mitigation plans. (3.4)
R4. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity failed
documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for to document or implement
Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and one or more plan(s) for
Removable Media, but failed Removable Media, but failed Removable Media, but failed Transient Cyber Assets and
to manage its Transient Cyber to implement the Removable to authorize its Transient Removable Media according to
Asset(s) according to CIP-010- Media sections according to Cyber Asset(s) according to CIP-010-4, Requirement R4.
(R4)
Page 20 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
4, Requirement R4, CIP-010-4, Requirement R4, CIP-010-4, Requirement R4,
Attachment 1, Section 1.1. (R4) Attachment 1, Section 3. (R4) Attachment 1, Section 1.2. (R4)
OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for
Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and
Removable Media, but failed Removable Media plan, but Removable Media, but failed
to document the Removable failed to document mitigation to implement mitigation of
Media sections according to of software vulnerabilities, software vulnerabilities,
CIP-010-4, Requirement R4, mitigation for the introduction mitigation for the introduction
Attachment 1, Section 3. (R4) of malicious code, or of malicious code, or
mitigation of the risk of mitigation of the risk of
OR
unauthorized use for Transient unauthorized use for Transient
The Responsible Entity
Cyber Assets managed by the Cyber Assets managed by the
documented its plan(s) for
Responsible Entity according to Responsible Entity according to
Transient Cyber Assets and
CIP-010-4, Requirement R4, CIP-010-4, Requirement R4,
Removable Media, but failed
Attachment 1, Sections 1.3, Attachment 1, Sections 1.3,
to document authorization for
1.4, and 1.5. (R4) 1.4, and 1.5. (R4)
Transient Cyber Assets
OR OR
managed by the Responsible
Entity according to CIP-010-4, The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Requirement R4, Attachment documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for
1, Section 1.2. (R4) Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and
Removable Media, but failed Removable Media, but failed
to document mitigation of to implement mitigation of
software vulnerabilities or software vulnerabilities or
mitigation for the introduction mitigation for the introduction
of malicious code for Transient of malicious code for Transient
Cyber Assets managed by a Cyber Assets managed by a
party other than the party other than the
Responsible Entity according to Responsible Entity according to
CIP-010-4, Requirement R4, CIP-010-4, Requirement R4,
Page 21 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Attachment 1, Sections 2.1, Attachment 1, Sections 2.1,
2.2, and 2.3. (R4) 2.2, and 2.3. (R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03.
• CIP-010-4 Technical Rationale
Page 22 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Developed to define the
configuration change
management and
vulnerability assessment
requirements in
coordination with other CIP
standards and to address
the balance of the FERC
directives in its Order 706.
1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-010-1.
(Order becomes effective on 2/3/14.)
2 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two FERC
directives from Order No.
791 related to identify,
assess, and correct language
and communication
networks.
2 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the version
adopted by the Board on
11/13/2014. Revised version
addresses remaining
directives from Order No.
791 related to transient
devices and low impact BES
Cyber Systems.
2 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-010-3.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
3 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address certain
directives in FERC Order No.
829.
3 10/18/2018 FERC Order approving CIP-010-3. Docket
No. RM17-13-000.
4 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address
directives in FERC Order No.
850.
4 3/18/2021 FERC order approving Docket No. RD21-
2-000
Page 23 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 - Attachment 1
Required Sections for Plans for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in their plan(s) for
Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media as required under Requirement R4.
Section 1. Transient Cyber Asset(s) Managed by the Responsible Entity.
1.1. Transient Cyber Asset Management: Responsible Entities shall manage
Transient Cyber Asset(s), individually or by group: (1) in an ongoing manner
to ensure compliance with applicable requirements at all times, (2) in an on-
demand manner applying the applicable requirements before connection to
a BES Cyber System, or (3) a combination of both (1) and (2) above.
1.2. Transient Cyber Asset Authorization: For each individual or group of
Transient Cyber Asset(s), each Responsible Entity shall authorize:
1.2.1. Users, either individually or by group or role;
1.2.2. Locations, either individually or by group; and
1.2.3. Uses, which shall be limited to what is necessary to perform business
functions.
1.3. Software Vulnerability Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the following
methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of vulnerabilities
posed by unpatched software on the Transient Cyber Asset (per Transient
Cyber Asset capability):
• Security patching, including manual or managed updates;
• Live operating system and software executable only from read-only
media;
• System hardening; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities.
1.4. Introduction of Malicious Code Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the introduction of
malicious code (per Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
1.5. Unauthorized Use Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the following
methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of unauthorized use
of Transient Cyber Asset(s):
Page 24 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
• Restrict physical access;
• Full-disk encryption with authentication;
• Multi-factor authentication; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the risk of unauthorized use.
Section 2. Transient Cyber Asset(s) Managed by a Party Other than the Responsible Entity.
2.1. Software Vulnerabilities Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of
vulnerabilities posed by unpatched software on the Transient Cyber Asset
(per Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Review of installed security patch(es);
• Review of security patching process used by the party;
• Review of other vulnerability mitigation performed by the party; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities.
2.2. Introduction of malicious code mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating malicious code (per
Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review use of live operating system and software executable only from
read-only media;
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate malicious code.
2.3. For any method used to mitigate software vulnerabilities or malicious code
as specified in 2.1 and 2.2, Responsible Entities shall determine whether any
additional mitigation actions are necessary and implement such actions prior
to connecting the Transient Cyber Asset.
Section 3. Removable Media
3.1. Removable Media Authorization: For each individual or group of Removable
Media, each Responsible Entity shall authorize:
3.1.1. Users, either individually or by group or role; and
3.1.2. Locations, either individually or by group.
3.2. Malicious Code Mitigation: To achieve the objective of mitigating the threat
of introducing malicious code to high impact or medium impact BES Cyber
Page 25 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Systems and their associated Protected Cyber Assets, each Responsible Entity
shall:
3.2.1. Use method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media using a
Cyber Asset other than a BES Cyber System or Protected Cyber Assets;
and
3.2.2. Mitigate the threat of detected malicious code on Removable Media
prior to connecting the Removable Media to a high impact or medium
impact BES Cyber System or associated Protected Cyber Assets.
Page 26 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 - Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Plans for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media
Section 1.1: Examples of evidence for Section 1.1 may include, but are not limited to, the
method(s) of management for the Transient Cyber Asset(s). This can be included
as part of the Transient Cyber Asset plan(s), part of the documentation related to
authorization of Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by the Responsible Entity or
part of a security policy.
Section 1.2: Examples of evidence for Section 1.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from asset management systems, human resource management
systems, or forms or spreadsheets that show authorization of Transient Cyber
Asset(s) managed by the Responsible Entity. Alternatively, this can be
documented in the overarching plan document.
Section 1.3: Examples of evidence for Section 1.3 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate software vulnerabilities posed
by unpatched software such as security patch management implementation, the
use of live operating systems from read-only media, system hardening practices
or other method(s) to mitigate the software vulnerability posed by unpatched
software. Evidence can be from change management systems, automated patch
management solutions, procedures or processes associated with using live
operating systems, or procedures or processes associated with system hardening
practices. If a Transient Cyber Asset does not have the capability to use method(s)
that mitigate the risk from unpatched software, evidence may include
documentation by the vendor or Responsible Entity that identifies that the
Transient Cyber Asset does not have the capability.
Section 1.4: Examples of evidence for Section 1.4 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern
updates, application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication,
or other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a Transient
Cyber Asset does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the
introduction of malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the
vendor or Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset does
not have the capability.
Section 1.5: Examples of evidence for Section 1.5 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation through policies or procedures of the method(s) to restrict
physical access; method(s) of the full-disk encryption solution along with the
authentication protocol; method(s) of the multi-factor authentication solution; or
documentation of other method(s) to mitigate the risk of unauthorized use.
Section 2.1: Examples of evidence for Section 2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or procedures
that document a review of installed security patch(es); memoranda, electronic
Page 27 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
mail, policies or contracts from parties other than the Responsible Entity that
identify the security patching process or vulnerability mitigation performed by the
party other than the Responsible Entity; evidence from change management
systems, electronic mail, system documentation or contracts that identifies
acceptance by the Responsible Entity that the practices of the party other than
the Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other method(s) to
mitigate software vulnerabilities for Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a party
other than the Responsible Entity. If a Transient Cyber Asset does not have the
capability to use method(s) that mitigate the risk from unpatched software,
evidence may include documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party other
than the Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset does not
have the capability.
Section 2.2: Examples of evidence for Section 2.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or procedures
that document a review of the installed antivirus update level; memoranda,
electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from the party other
than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update process, the use of
application whitelisting, use of live of operating systems or system hardening
performed by the party other than the Responsible Entity; evidence from change
management systems, electronic mail or contracts that identifies the Responsible
Entity’s acceptance that the practices of the party other than the Responsible
Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other method(s) to mitigate malicious
code for Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a party other than the Responsible
Entity. If a Transient Cyber Asset does not have the capability to use method(s)
that mitigate the introduction of malicious code, evidence may include
documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party other than the Responsible
Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset does not have the capability.
Section 2.3: Examples of evidence for Section 2.3 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or contracts
that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigations are
necessary and that they have been implemented prior to connecting the
Transient Cyber Asset managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity.
Section 3.1: Examples of evidence for Section 3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from asset management systems, human resource management
systems, forms or spreadsheets that shows authorization of Removable Media.
The documentation must identify Removable Media, individually or by group of
Removable Media, along with the authorized users, either individually or by
group or role, and the authorized locations, either individually or by group.
Section 3.2: Examples of evidence for Section 3.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to mitigate malicious code such
as results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on-
demand scanning. Documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating
Page 28 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
the threat of detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the
method(s) used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and
that show mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or
documented confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed
to be free of malicious code.
Page 29 of 29
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-010-4.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-015-1.pdf ---
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
2. Number: CIP-015-1
3. Purpose: To improve the probability of detecting anomalous or unauthorized
network activity in order to facilitate improved response and recovery from an attack.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
Page 1 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems,
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Reliability Standard CIP-015-
1:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to
one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact with
External Routable Connectivity (ERC) according to the
identification and categorization processes required by CIP-002
or any subsequent version of that Reliability Standard.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for CIP-015-1.
Page 3 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) for
internal network security monitoring of networks protected by the Responsible
Entity’s Electronic Security Perimeter(s) of high impact BES Cyber Systems and
medium impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity to provide
methods for detecting and evaluating anomalous network activity. The documented
process(es) shall include each of the following requirement Parts: [Violation Risk
Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Same Day Operations and Operations Assessment]
1.1. Implement, using a risk-based rationale, network data feed(s) to monitor
network activity; including connections, devices, and network communications.
1.2. Implement one or more method(s) to detect anomalous network activity using
the network data feed(s) from Part 1.1.
1.3. Implement one or more method(s) to evaluate anomalous network activity
detected in Part 1.2. to determine further action(s).
M1. Evidence must include each of the documented process(es) that collectively include
each of the requirement Parts in Requirement R1 and evidence to demonstrate
implementation of the process(es). Examples of evidence of implementation of the
requirement Parts may include, but is not limited to:
Part 1.1.
• Documentation detailing network data feed(s) that includes a documented risk-
based rationale that describes how network data feed(s) were selected for data
collection.
Part 1.2.
• Documentation of anomalous network detection events;
• Documentation of configuration settings of internal network security monitoring
systems;
• Documentation of network communication baseline used to detect anomalous
network activity; or
• Documentation of other methods used to detect anomalous network activity.
Part 1.3.
• Documentation of method(s) used to evaluate anomalous activity;
• Documentation of actions in response to detected anomalies; or
• Documentation of escalation process(es) that could include CIP-008 Cyber
Security Incident response plan(s).
Page 4 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement, except during CIP Exceptional
Circumstances, one or more documented process(es) to retain internal network
security monitoring data associated with network activity determined to be
anomalous by the Responsible Entity at a minimum until the action is complete in
support of Requirement R1, Part 1.3. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon:
Same Day Operations and Operations Assessment]
Note: The Responsible Entity is not required to retain internal network security
monitoring data that is not relevant to anomalous network activity detected in
Requirement R1, Part 1.2.
M2. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, documentation of the
internal network security monitoring data retention process(es), system
configuration(s), or system-generated report(s) showing data retention with timelines
sufficient to support Requirement R1, Part 1.3.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement, except during CIP Exceptional
Circumstances, one or more documented process(es) to protect internal network
security monitoring data collected in support of Requirement R1 and data retained in
support of Requirement R2 to mitigate the risks of unauthorized deletion or
modification. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Same Day Operations and
Operations Assessment]
M3. Evidence may include, but is not limited to, documentation demonstrating how
internal network security monitoring data is being protected from the risk of
unauthorized deletion or modification.
Page 5 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring
and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability
Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show
that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer
period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved, or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records, and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 6 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity did not
N/A
R1. N/A The Responsible Entity did not
include any of the applicable
implement, using a risk-based
requirement Parts for
rationale, network data feed(s)
detecting and evaluating
to monitor network activity;
anomalous network activity.
including connections, devices,
and network communications.
(1.1.).
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement one or more
method(s) to detect
anomalous network activity
using the network data
feed(s) from Part 1.1 (1.2.).
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement one or more
method(s) to evaluate
anomalous network activity
detected in Part 1.2. to
determine further action(s)
(1.3.).
N/A The Responsible Entity did not
N/A
R2. N/A
implement, except during CIP
Exceptional Circumstances,
one or more documented
process(es) to retain internal
network security monitoring
Page 7 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
data associated with network
activity determined to be
anomalous by the Responsible
Entity, at a minimum until the
action is complete, in support
of Part 1.3.
N/A The Responsible Entity did not,
N/A
R3. N/A
except during CIP Exceptional
Circumstances, implement one
or more documented
process(es) to protect internal
network security monitoring
data collected in support of
Requirement R1 and data
retained in support of
Requirement R2 to mitigate
the risks of unauthorized
deletion or modification.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
Link to the Implementation Plan and other important associated documents.
Page 8 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
Version History
Version Date Action Change
Tracking
1 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
1 6/26/2025 FERC Order approving CIP-015-1.
Docket No. RM24-7-000.
Page 9 of 9
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-015-1.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-002-8.pdf ---
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
2. Number: CIP-002-8
3. Purpose: To identify and categorize BES Cyber Systems (BCS) and their associated
BES Cyber Assets (BCA) for the application of cyber security requirements
commensurate with the adverse impact that loss, compromise, or misuse of those BCS
could have on the reliable operation of the Bulk Electric System (BES). Identification
and categorization of BCS support appropriate protection against compromises that
could lead to misoperation or instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein,
the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-002-8:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESPs).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends
to one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates: See Implementation Plan for CIP-002
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement a process that considers each of the
following assets for purposes of Parts 1.1 through 1.3: [Violation Risk Factor: High]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
i. Control Centers and backup Control Centers;
ii. Transmission stations and substations;
iii. Generation resources;
iv. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart
Resources and Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements;
v. RAS that support the reliable operation of the BES; and
vi. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability
section 4.2.1 above.
1.1. Identify each of the high impact BCS according to Attachment 1, Section 1, if
any, at each asset;
1.2. Identify each of the medium impact BCS according to Attachment 1, Section 2,
if any, at each asset; and
1.3. Identify each asset that contains a low impact BCS according to Attachment 1,
Section 3, if any (a discrete list of low impact BCS is not required).
M1. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, dated electronic or physical lists
required by Requirement R1.
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall: [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations
Planning]
2.1 Review the identifications in Requirement R1 and its parts (and update them if
there are changes identified) at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it
has no identified items in Requirement R1, and
2.2 Have its CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications required
by Requirement R1 at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it has no
identified items in Requirement R1.
M2. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, electronic or physical dated
records to demonstrate that the Responsible Entity has reviewed and updated, where
necessary, the identifications required in Requirement R1 and its parts, and has had its
CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications required in Requirement
R1 and its parts at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it has none identified
in Requirement R1 and its parts, as required by Requirement R2.
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” means NERC or the Regional Entity in their
respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance with the NERC
Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the Compliance Enforcement Authority may ask an entity to
provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period
since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its Compliance Enforcement Authority to
retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program:
“Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” or “CMEP” means, depending on
the context (1) the NERC Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program (Appendix
4C to the NERC Rules of Procedure) or the Commission-approved program of a Regional
Entity, as applicable, or (2) the program, department or organization within NERC or a
Regional Entity that is responsible for performing compliance monitoring and
enforcement activities with respect to Registered Entities’ compliance with Reliability
Standards.
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
Violation Severity Levels
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-8)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with
more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES
assets in Requirement R1, five assets in Requirement R1, more assets in Requirement R1, assets in Requirement R1,
percent or fewer BES assets have than five percent, but less than more than 10 percent, but less more than 15 percent of BES
not been considered according or equal to 10 percent of BES than or equal to 15 percent of assets have not been
to Requirement R1; assets have not been BES assets have not been considered, according to
considered, according to considered, according to Requirement R1;
OR
Requirement R1; Requirement R1;
OR
For Responsible Entities with a
OR OR
total of 40 or fewer BES assets, 2 For Responsible Entities with a
or fewer BES assets in For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a total of 40 or fewer BES assets,
Requirement R1, have not been total of 40 or fewer BES assets, total of 40 or fewer BES assets, more than six BES assets in
considered according to more than two, but fewer than more than four, but fewer than Requirement R1, have not
Requirement R1; or equal to four BES assets in or equal to six BES assets in been considered according to
Requirement R1, have not been Requirement R1, have not Requirement R1;
OR
considered according to been considered according to
OR
For Responsible Entities with Requirement R1; Requirement R1;
more than a total of 100 high For Responsible Entities with
OR OR
and medium impact BCS, five more than a total of 100 high
percent or fewer of identified For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with and medium impact BCS, more
BCS have not been categorized more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high than 15 percent of identified
or have been incorrectly and medium impact BCS, more or medium impact BCS, more BCS have not been categorized
categorized at a lower category; than five percent, but less than than 10 percent, but less than or have been incorrectly
or equal to 10 percent of or equal to 15 percent of categorized at a lower
OR
identified BCS have not been identified BCS have not been category;
For Responsible Entities with a categorized or have been categorized or have been
OR
total of 100 or fewer high and incorrectly categorized at a incorrectly categorized at a
medium impact BCS, five or lower category; lower category; For Responsible Entities with a
fewer identified BCS have not total of 100 or fewer high and
OR OR
been categorized or have been medium impact BCS, more
incorrectly categorized at a For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a than 15 identified BCS have
lower category. total of 100 or fewer high and total of 100 or fewer high or not been categorized or have
medium impact BCS, more than medium impact BCS, more been incorrectly categorized at
OR
Page 6 of 12
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-8)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
five, but less than or equal to 10 than 10, but less than or equal a lower category.
For Responsible Entities with
identified BES Cyber Systems to 15 identified BCS have not
more than a total of 100 high OR
have not been categorized or been categorized or have been
and medium impact BCS, five
have been incorrectly incorrectly categorized at a For Responsible Entities with
percent or fewer high or medium
categorized at a lower category. lower category. more than a total of 100 high
BCS have not been identified;
and medium impact BCS, more
OR OR
OR than 15 percent of high or
For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with medium impact BCS have not
For Responsible Entities with a
more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high been identified;
total of 100 or fewer high and
and medium impact BCS, more and medium impact BCS, more
medium impact BCS, five or OR
than five percent, but less than than 10 percent, but less than
fewer high or medium BCS have
or equal to 10 percent high or or equal to 15 percent high or For Responsible Entities with a
not been identified.
medium BCS have not been medium BCS have not been total of 100 or fewer high and
identified; identified; medium impact BES Cyber
Systems, more than 15 high or
OR OR
medium impact BCS have not
For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a been identified.
total of 100 or fewer high and total of 100 or fewer high and
medium impact BCS, more than medium impact BCS, more
five, but less than or equal to 10 than 10, but less than or equal
high or medium BCS have not to 15 high or medium BCS have
been identified. not been identified.
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
complete its review and update complete its review and update complete its review and update complete its review and update
for the identification required for the identification required for the identification required for the identification required
for Requirement R1 within 15 for Requirement R1 within 16 for Requirement R1 within 17 for Requirement R1 within 18
calendar months, but less than calendar months, but less than calendar months, but less than calendar months of the
or equal to 16 calendar months or equal to 17 calendar months or equal to 18 calendar months previous review. (Part 2.1)
of the previous review. (Part of the previous review. of the previous review. (Part
OR
2.1) (Part2.1) 2.1)
The Responsible Entity failed to
OR OR OR
complete its approval of the
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity failed to The Responsible Entity failed to identifications required by
complete its approval of the complete its approval of the complete its approval of the Requirement R1 by the CIP
identifications required by identifications required by identifications required by Senior Manager or delegate
Page 7 of 12
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-8)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP according to Requirement R2
Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate within 18 calendar months of
according to Requirement R2 according to Requirement R2 according to Requirement R2 the previous approval. (Part
within 15 calendar months, but within 16 calendar months, but within 17 calendar months, but 2.2)
less than or equal to 16 less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18
calendar months of the calendar months of the calendar months of the
previous approval. (Part 2.2) previous approval. (Part 2.2) previous approval. (Part 2.2)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2021-03
• CIP-002-8 Technical Rationale
Page 8 of 12
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
Version History
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and to
bring the compliance elements into conformance
with the latest guidelines for developing
compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a Responsible
Entity. Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated version number from -2 to -3. Update
Approved by the NERC Board of
Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 12/30/10 Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Asset Update
identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board Trustees. Modified to coordinate
with other CIP standards
and to revise format to
use RBS Template.
5.1 9/30/13 Replaced “Devices” with “Systems” in a definition Errata
in background section.
5.1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-002-5.1.
5.1a 11/02/16 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5.1a 12/14/2016 FERC letter Order approving CIP-002-5.1a.
Docket No. RD17-2-000.
6 5/14/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified Criterion 2.12
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees Virtualization Modifications
under Project 2016-02
8 12/10/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees Transmission Owners
Control Centers Updates
under Project 2021-03
Page 9 of 12
Attachment 1
Attachment 1 – Impact Rating Criteria
Impact Rating Criteria
The criteria defined in Attachment 1 do not constitute stand-alone compliance requirements, but
are criteria characterizing the level of impact and are referenced by requirements.
1. High impact rating
Each BCS used by and located at any of the following:
1.1. For Reliability Coordinators, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Reliability Coordinator.
1.2. For Balancing Authorities, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Balancing Authority for: 1) generation equal to or
greater than an aggregate of 3000 MW in a single Interconnection, or 2) one or more of
the assets that meet criterion 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
1.3. For Transmission Operators and Transmission Owners, each Control Center or backup
Control Center for one or more of the assets that meet criterion 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8,
2.9, or 2.10.
1.4 For Generator Operators, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Generator Operator for one or more of the assets
that meet criterion 2.1, 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
2. Medium impact rating
Each BCS, not included in Section 1 above, associated with any of the following:
2.1. Commissioned generation, by each group of generating units at a single plant location,
with an aggregate highest rated net Real Power capability of the preceding 12 calendar
months equal to or exceeding 1500 MW in a single Interconnection. For each group of
generating units, the only BCS that meet this criterion are each discrete shared BCS that
could, within 15 minutes, adversely impact the reliable operation of any combination of
units that in aggregate equal or exceed 1500 MW in a single Interconnection.
2.2. Each BES reactive resource or group of resources at a single location (excluding
generation Facilities) with an aggregate maximum Reactive Power nameplate rating of
1000 MVAR or greater (excluding those at generation Facilities). The only BCS that
meet this criterion are each discrete shared BCS that could, within 15 minutes,
adversely impact the reliable operation of any combination of resources that in
aggregate equal or exceed 1000 MVAR.
2.3. Each generation Facility that its Planning Coordinator or Transmission Planner
designates, and informs the Generator Owner or Generator Operator, as necessary to
avoid an Adverse Reliability Impact in the planning horizon of more than one year.
2.4. Transmission Facilities operated at 500 kV or higher. For the purpose of this criterion,
the collector bus for a generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is
part of the generation interconnection Facility.
2.5. Transmission Facilities that are operating between 200 kV and 499 kV at a single station
or substation, where the station or substation is connected at 200 kV or higher voltages
to three or more other Transmission stations or substations and has an "aggregate weighted
Page 10 of 12
Attachment 1
value" exceeding 3000 according to the table below. The "aggregate weighted value" for a
single station or substation is determined by summing the "weight value per line" shown in the
table below for each incoming and each outgoing BES Transmission Line that is connected to
another Transmission station or substation. For the purpose of this criterion, the collector bus
for a generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is part of the generation
interconnection Facility.
Voltage Value of a Line Weight Value per Line
less than 200 kV (not applicable) (not applicable)
200 kV to 299 kV 700
300 kV to 499 kV 1300
500 kV and above 0 (N/A)
2.6. Generation at a single plant location or Transmission Facilities at a single station or
substation location that are identified by its Reliability Coordinator, Planning
Coordinator, or Transmission Planner as critical to the derivation of Interconnection
Reliability Operating Limits (IROLs) and their associated contingencies.
2.7. Transmission Facilities identified as essential to meeting Nuclear Plant Interface
Requirements.
2.8. Transmission Facilities, including generation interconnection Facilities, providing the
generation interconnection required to connect generator output to the Transmission
Systems that, if destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable,
would result in the loss of the generation Facilities identified by any Generator Owner
as a result of its application of Attachment 1, criterion 2.1 or 2.3.
2.9. Each RAS or automated switching System that operates BES Elements, that, if
destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable, would cause one or
more IROLs violations for failure to operate as designed or cause a reduction in one or
more IROLs if destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable.
2.10. Each system or group of Elements that performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system, without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more
implementing UVLS or UFLS under a load shedding program that is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or regional reliability standard.
2.11. For Generator Operators, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Generator Operator for an aggregate highest rated
net Real Power capability of the preceding 12 calendar months equal to or exceeding
1500 MW in a single Interconnection.
2.12. For Transmission Operators and Transmission Owners, each Control Center or backup
Control Center with an “aggregate weighted value” exceeding 6000 according to the
table below and subject to the listed exclusion. The “aggregate weighted value” for a
Control Center or backup Control Center is determined by summing the “weight value
per BES Transmission Line,” shown in the table below, for lines that are monitored and
controlled by the Control Center or backup Control Center. Include each BES Transmission Line
that is connected between two or more Transmission stations or substations.
Page 11 of 12
Attachment 1
Voltage Value of a BES Weight Value per BES
Transmission Line Transmission Line
<100 kV 100
100 kV to 199 kV 250
200 kV to 299 kV 700
300 kV to 499 kV 1300
500 kV and above 0 (N/A)
Exclusion:
Provided that the “aggregate weighted value” calculated according to the table above
is less than 12000, a Transmission Operator or a Transmission Owner may exclude the
BES Transmission Lines that are contained in a single group of contiguous Elements
from their “aggregate weighted value” calculation, where a group of contiguous
Elements is defined as:
• a group of contiguous Elements emanating from multiple points of
connection at 69 kV or higher;
• that are operated at less than 300 kV; and
• where the gross export does not exceed 75 MWh during non-Energy
Emergency Alert conditions. The gross export is based on the hourly
integrated values of the preceding 12 calendar months.
2.13. For Balancing Authorities, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Balancing Authority for generation equal to or
greater than an aggregate of 1500 MW in a single Interconnection.
3. Low impact rating
BCS not included in Sections 1 or 2 above that are associated with any of the following assets
and that meet the applicability qualifications in Section 4 - Applicability, part 4.2 – Facilities,
of this standard:
3.1. Control Centers and backup Control Centers.
3.2. Transmission stations and substations.
3.3. Generation resources.
3.4. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart Resources and
Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements.
3.5. RAS that support the reliable operation of the BES.
3.6. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability section 4.2.1
above.
Page 12 of 12
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-002-8.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-013-3.pdf ---
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
2. Number: CIP-013-3
3. Purpose: To mitigate cyber security risks to the reliable operation of the Bulk
Electric System (BES) by implementing security controls for supply chain risk
management of BES Cyber Systems (BCS).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in
Page 1 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset
of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-013-3:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESPs).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between Cyber Systems providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or
more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
Page 2 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
4.2.3.6. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the identification and categorization process
required by CIP-002 or any subsequent version of that Reliability
Standard.
5. Effective Date: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan”.
Page 3 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall develop one or more documented supply chain cyber
security risk management plan(s) for high and medium impact BCS and their
associated Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS), Physical Access
Control Systems (PACS), and Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI). The plan(s) shall include:
[Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. One or more process(es) used in planning for the procurement of applicable
systems listed in Requirement R1 to identify and assess cyber security risk(s) to
the BES from vendor products or services resulting from: (i) procuring and
installing vendor equipment and software; and (ii) transitions from one vendor(s)
to another vendor(s).
1.2. One or more process(es) used in procuring applicable systems listed in
Requirement R1 that address the following, as applicable:
1.2.1. Notification by the vendor of vendor-identified incidents related to the
products or services provided to the Responsible Entity that pose cyber
security risk to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.2. Coordination of responses to vendor-identified incidents related to the
products or services provided to the Responsible Entity that pose cyber
security risk to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.3. Notification by vendors when remote or onsite access should no longer
be granted to vendor representatives;
1.2.4. Disclosure by vendors of known vulnerabilities related to the products or
services provided to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.5. Verification of software integrity and authenticity of all software and
patches provided by the vendor; and
1.2.6. Coordination of controls for vendor-initiated remote access.
M1. Evidence shall include one or more documented supply chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) as specified in the Requirement.
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement its supply chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) specified in Requirement R1. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
Note: Implementation of the plan does not require the Responsible Entity to
renegotiate or abrogate existing contracts (including amendments to master
agreements and purchase orders). Additionally, the following issues are beyond the
scope of Requirement R2: (1) the actual terms and conditions of a procurement
contract; and (2) vendor performance and adherence to a contract.
M2. Evidence shall include documentation to demonstrate implementation of the supply
chain cyber security risk management plan(s), which could include, but is not limited
to, correspondence, policy documents, or working documents that demonstrate use
of the supply chain cyber security risk management plan.
Page 4 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager or delegate
approval of its supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s) specified in
Requirement R1 at least once every 15 calendar months. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. Evidence shall include the dated supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s)
approved by the CIP Senior Manager or delegate(s) and additional evidence to
demonstrate review of the supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s).
Evidence may include, but is not limited to, policy documents, revision history,
records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management system that
indicate review of supply chain risk management plan(s) at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager or delegate.
Page 5 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity,
or any entity as otherwise designated by an Applicable Governmental Authority,
in their respective roles of monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with
mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in their respective
jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period of time an entity
is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to
show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and
Enforcement Program” refers to the identification of the processes that will be
used to evaluate data or information for the purpose of assessing performance
or outcomes with the associated Reliability Standard.
Page 6 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity’s supply The Responsible Entity’s supply The Responsible Entity’s supply The Responsible Entity’s supply
chain cyber risk management chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk
plan(s) did not include one of management plan(s) did not management plan(s) did not management plan(s) did not
the parts in Part 1.2.1 through include two or more of the include the use of process(es) include the use of process(es)
Part 1.2.6. parts in Part 1.2.1 through Part in planning for procurement of in planning for procurement
1.2.6. applicable systems as specified applicable systems as specified
in Part 1.1. in Part 1.1, and the supply
chain cyber security risk
OR
management plan(s) did not
The Responsible Entity’s supply include the use of process(es)
chain cyber security risk for procuring applicable
management plan(s) did not systems as specified in Part
include the use of process(es) 1.2.
for procuring applicable
OR
systems as specified in Part
1.2. The Responsible Entity did not
develop one or more
documented supply chain
cyber security risk
management plan(s) as
specified in Requirement R1.
R2. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
implement one of the parts in implement two or more of the implement the use of implement the use of
Part 1.2.1 through Part 1.2.6. parts in Part 1.2.1 through Part process(es) for procuring process(es) in planning for
1.2.6. applicable systems as specified procurement of applicable
in Part 1.2. systems as specified in Part
1.1, and did not implement the
use of process(es) for
Page 7 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
procuring applicable systems
as specified in Part 1.2;
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement its supply chain
cyber security risk
management plan(s) specified
in Requirement R2.
R3. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not
exceeded 15 calendar months exceeded the 15 calendar exceeded 15 calendar months review and obtain CIP Senior
by reviewing and obtaining CIP months by reviewing and by reviewing and obtaining CIP Manager or delegate approval
Senior Manager or delegate obtaining CIP Senior Manager Senior Manager or delegate of its supply chain cyber
approval of its supply chain or delegate approval of its approval of its supply chain security risk management
cyber security risk supply chain cyber security risk cyber security risk plan(s) within 18 calendar
management plan(s) in the 16th management plan(s) in the 17th management plan(s) in the 18th months of the previous review.
calendar month since the calendar month since the calendar month since the
previous review. previous review. previous review.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-013-3 Technical Rationale
Page 8 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board Respond to FERC Order No. 829.
of Trustees.
1 10/18/18 FERC Order approving CIP-
013-1. Docket No. RM17-13-
000.
2 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board Modifications to address
of Trustees. directive in FERC Order No. 850.
2 3/18/2021 FERC Order approving CIP-
013-2. Docket No. RD21-2-
000.
3 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board Virtualization Modifications by
of Trustees Project 2016-02
Page 9 of 9
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-013-3.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-007-6.pdf ---
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — System Security Management
2. Number: CIP-007-6
3. Purpose: To manage system security by specifying select technical, operational,
and procedural requirements in support of protecting BES Cyber Systems against
compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric System
(BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional entity
or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities, systems,
and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load shedding
(UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Special Protection System (SPS) or Remedial Action Scheme (RAS)
where the SPS or RAS is subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or
Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Interchange Coordinator or Interchange Authority
4.1.6 Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
4.1.7 Transmission Operator
4.1.8 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above
are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or restoration
of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each SPS or RAS where the SPS or RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-007-6:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security Perimeters.
4.2.3.3 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R.
Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not included
in section 4.2.1 above.
Page 2 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
4.2.3.5 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber Systems
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the CIP-002-5.1
identification and categorization processes.
5. Effective Dates:
See Implementation Plan for CIP-007-6.
6. Background:
Standard CIP-007 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber security,
which requires the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems and
require a minimum level of organizational, operational and procedural controls to
mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements.
An entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes,
but it must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident
response plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an
approach involving multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the
standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training
program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be
referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any
additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented processes.
These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Page 3 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the BES. A
review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability standards for UFLS
program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of 300 MW
represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems
to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management
Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact
and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used in the
“Applicable Systems” column as described.
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at Control Centers – Only applies to medium
impact BES Cyber Systems located at a Control Center.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity – Only
applies to medium impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity.
This also excludes Cyber Assets in the BES Cyber System that cannot be directly
accessed through External Routable Connectivity.
 Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced high
impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System in the applicability
column. Examples may include, but are not limited to, firewalls, authentication
servers, and log monitoring and alerting systems.
 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access Control
System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium
impact BES Cyber System.
Page 4 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
 Protected Cyber Assets (PCA) – Applies to each Protected Cyber Asset associated
with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber
System.
Page 5 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-6 Table R1 – Ports and Services. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon:
Same Day Operations.]
M1. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
007-6 Table R1 – Ports and Services and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures
column of the table.
Page 6 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R1– Ports and Services
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Where technically feasible, enable only Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: logical network accessible ports that are not limited to:
1. EACMS; have been determined to be needed by
 Documentation of the need for
2. PACS; and
the Responsible Entity, including port
all enabled ports on all
ranges or services where needed to
3. PCA
applicable Cyber Assets and
handle dynamic ports. If a device has
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems no provision for disabling or restricting Electronic Access Points,
with External Routable Connectivity
logical ports on the device then those individually or by group.
and their associated:
ports that are open are deemed
 Listings of the listening ports on
1. EACMS;
needed.
the Cyber Assets, individually or
2. PACS; and
by group, from either the device
3. PCA
configuration files, command
output (such as netstat), or
network scans of open ports; or
 Configuration files of host-
based firewalls or other device
level mechanisms that only
allow needed ports and deny all
others.
Page 7 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R1– Ports and Services
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Protect against the use of unnecessary An example of evidence may include,
their associated: physical input/output ports used for but is not limited to, documentation
network connectivity, console showing types of protection of physical
1. PCA; and
commands, or Removable Media. input/output ports, either logically
2. Nonprogrammable
through system configuration or
communication components
physically using a port lock or signage.
located inside both a PSP and
an ESP.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
Control Centers and their associated:
1. PCA; and
2. Nonprogrammable
communication components
located inside both a PSP and
an ESP.
Page 8 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-6 Table R2 – Security Patch Management. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-007-6 Table R2 – Security Patch Management and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-007-6 Table R2 – Security Patch Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and A patch management process for An example of evidence may include,
their associated: tracking, evaluating, and installing but is not limited to, documentation
1. EACMS; cyber security patches for applicable of a patch management process and
2. PACS; and
Cyber Assets. The tracking portion documentation or lists of sources that
shall include the identification of a are monitored, whether on an
3. PCA
source or sources that the individual BES Cyber System or Cyber
Responsible Entity tracks for the Asset basis.
release of cyber security patches for
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
applicable Cyber Assets that are
and their associated:
updateable and for which a patching
1. EACMS;
source exists.
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 9 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R2 – Security Patch Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and At least once every 35 calendar days, An example of evidence may include,
their associated: evaluate security patches for but is not limited to, an evaluation
1. EACMS; applicability that have been released conducted by, referenced by, or on
2. PACS; and
since the last evaluation from the behalf of a Responsible Entity of
source or sources identified in Part security-related patches released by
3. PCA
2.1. the documented sources at least once
every 35 calendar days.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 10 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R2 – Security Patch Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and For applicable patches identified in Examples of evidence may include,
their associated: Part 2.2, within 35 calendar days of but are not limited to:
1. EACMS; the evaluation completion, take one
 Records of the installation of
2. PACS; and
of the following actions:
the patch (e.g., exports from
3. PCA  Apply the applicable patches; or
automated patch
 Create a dated mitigation plan;
management tools that
or
provide installation date,
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
 Revise an existing mitigation
and their associated: verification of BES Cyber
1. EACMS; plan. System Component software
2. PACS; and revision, or registry exports
Mitigation plans shall include the
3. PCA that show software has been
Responsible Entity’s planned actions
installed); or
to mitigate the vulnerabilities
addressed by each security patch and  A dated plan showing when
a timeframe to complete these
and how the vulnerability will
mitigations.
be addressed, to include
documentation of the actions
to be taken by the Responsible
Entity to mitigate the
vulnerabilities addressed by
the security patch and a
timeframe for the completion
of these mitigations.
Page 11 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R2 – Security Patch Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and For each mitigation plan created or An example of evidence may include,
their associated: revised in Part 2.3, implement the but is not limited to, records of
1. EACMS; plan within the timeframe specified in implementation of mitigations.
2. PACS; and
the plan, unless a revision to the plan
or an extension to the timeframe
3. PCA
specified in Part 2.3 is approved by
the CIP Senior Manager or delegate.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 12 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-6 Table R3 – Malicious Code Prevention. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Same Day Operations].
M3. Evidence must include each of the documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable requirement
parts in CIP-007-6 Table R3 – Malicious Code Prevention and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-007-6 Table R3 – Malicious Code Prevention
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Deploy method(s) to deter, detect, or An example of evidence may include,
their associated: prevent malicious code. but is not limited to, records of the
1. EACMS; Responsible Entity’s performance of
2. PACS; and
these processes (e.g., through
traditional antivirus, system
3. PCA
hardening, policies, etc.).
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 13 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R3 – Malicious Code Prevention
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Mitigate the threat of detected Examples of evidence may include,
their associated: malicious code. but are not limited to:
1. EACMS;
 Records of response processes
2. PACS; and
for malicious code detection
3. PCA
 Records of the performance of
these processes when malicious
code is detected.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
3.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and For those methods identified in Part An example of evidence may include,
their associated: 3.1 that use signatures or patterns, but is not limited to, documentation
1. EACMS; have a process for the update of the showing the process used for the
2. PACS; and
signatures or patterns. The process update of signatures or patterns.
must address testing and installing the
3. PCA
signatures or patterns.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 14 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R4. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-6 Table R4 – Security Event Monitoring. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Same Day Operations and Operations Assessment.]
M4. Evidence must include each of the documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable requirement
parts in CIP-007-6 Table R4 – Security Event Monitoring and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-007-6 Table R4 – Security Event Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Log events at the BES Cyber System Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: level (per BES Cyber System capability) are not limited to, a paper or system
1. EACMS; or at the Cyber Asset level (per Cyber generated listing of event types for
2. PACS; and
Asset capability) for identification of, which the BES Cyber System is capable
and after-the-fact investigations of, of detecting and, for generated
3. PCA
Cyber Security Incidents that includes, events, is configured to log. This listing
as a minimum, each of the following must include the required types of
types of events: events.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated: 4.1.1. Detected successful login
1. EACMS;
attempts;
2. PACS; and
4.1.2. Detected failed access
3. PCA
attempts and failed login
attempts;
4.1.3. Detected malicious code.
Page 15 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R4 – Security Event Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Generate alerts for security events Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: that the Responsible Entity are not limited to, paper or system-
1. EACMS; determines necessitates an alert, that generated listing of security events
2. PACS; and
includes, as a minimum, each of the that the Responsible Entity
following types of events (per Cyber determined necessitate alerts,
3. PCA
Asset or BES Cyber System capability): including paper or system generated
list showing how alerts are configured.
4.2.1. Detected malicious code from
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
Part 4.1; and
with External Routable Connectivity
4.2.2. Detected failure of Part 4.1
and their associated:
event logging.
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 16 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R4 – Security Event Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Where technically feasible, retain Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: applicable event logs identified in Part are not limited to, documentation of
1. EACMS; 4.1 for at least the last 90 consecutive the event log retention process and
2. PACS; and
calendar days except under CIP paper or system generated reports
Exceptional Circumstances. showing log retention configuration
3. PCA
set at 90 days or greater.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
Control Centers and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
4.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Review a summarization or sampling Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: of logged events as determined by the are not limited to, documentation
1. EACMS; and Responsible Entity at intervals no describing the review, any findings
2. PCA
greater than 15 calendar days to from the review (if any), and dated
identify undetected Cyber Security documentation showing the review
Incidents. occurred.
Page 17 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R5. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-007-6 Table R5 – System Access Controls. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning].
M5. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-007-6 Table 5 – System Access Controls and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation
as described in the Measures column of the table.
Page 18 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Have a method(s) to enforce An example of evidence may include,
their associated: authentication of interactive user access, but is not limited to, documentation
1. EACMS; where technically feasible. describing how access is
2. PACS; and
authenticated.
3. PCA
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
Control Centers and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
with External Routable Connectivity
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 19 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Identify and inventory all known enabled An example of evidence may include,
their associated: default or other generic account types, but is not limited to, a listing of
1. EACMS; either by system, by groups of systems, by accounts by account types showing
2. PACS; and
location, or by system type(s). the enabled or generic account types
in use for the BES Cyber System.
3. PCA
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 20 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Identify individuals who have authorized An example of evidence may include,
their associated: access to shared accounts. but is not limited to, listing of shared
1. EACMS; accounts and the individuals who have
2. PACS; and
authorized access to each shared
account.
3. PCA
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
with External Routable Connectivity
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 21 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Change known default passwords, per Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: Cyber Asset capability are not limited to:
1. EACMS;
 Records of a procedure that
2. PACS; and
passwords are changed when new
3. PCA
devices are in production; or
 Documentation in system manuals
or other vendor documents
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated: showing default vendor
1. EACMS; passwords were generated
2. PACS; and pseudo-randomly and are thereby
3. PCA unique to the device.
Page 22 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and For password-only authentication for Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: interactive user access, either technically are not limited to:
1. EACMS; or procedurally enforce the following
 System-generated reports or
2. PACS; and
password parameters:
screen-shots of the system-
3. PCA 5.5.1. Password length that is, at least,
enforced password parameters,
the lesser of eight characters or
including length and complexity;
the maximum length supported by
or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems the Cyber Asset; and
 Attestations that include a
and their associated:
5.5.2. Minimum password complexity
reference to the documented
1. EACMS;
that is the lesser of three or more
procedures that were followed.
2. PACS; and different types of characters (e.g.,
3. PCA
uppercase alphabetic, lowercase
alphabetic, numeric, non-
alphanumeric) or the maximum
complexity supported by the Cyber
Asset.
Page 23 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.6 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Where technically feasible, for Examples of evidence may include,
their associated: password-only authentication for but are not limited to:
1. EACMS; interactive user access, either
 System-generated reports or
2. PACS; and
technically or procedurally enforce
screen-shots of the system-
password changes or an obligation to
3. PCA
enforced periodicity of changing
change the password at least once
passwords; or
every 15 calendar months.
 Attestations that include a
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
reference to the documented
with External Routable Connectivity
procedures that were followed.
and their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 24 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
CIP-007-6 Table R5 – System Access Control
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.7 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Where technically feasible, either: Examples of evidence may include,
their associated:  Limit the number of but are not limited to:
1. EACMS;
unsuccessful authentication
 Documentation of the account-
2. PACS; and
attempts; or lockout parameters; or
3. PCA
 Generate alerts after a
 Rules in the alerting configuration
threshold of unsuccessful
showing how the system notified
authentication attempts. individuals after a determined
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
number of unsuccessful login
at Control Centers and their
attempts.
associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 25 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means
NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance
with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required to
retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence
retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask
an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since
the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified below
unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as part of an
investigation:
 Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard for three
calendar years.
 If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the non-
compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time specified above,
whichever is longer.
 The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent audit
records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
Compliance Audits
Self-Certifications
Spot Checking
Compliance Violation Investigations
Self-Reporting
Complaints
1.4. Additional Compliance Information:
None
Page 26 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
2. Table of Compliance Elements
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible
R1 Same Day Medium N/A The Responsible The Responsible
Entity has
Operations Entity has Entity did not
implemented and
implemented and implement or
documented
documented document one or
processes for
processes for Ports more process(es)
determining
and Services but had that included the
necessary Ports and
no methods to applicable items in
Services but, where
protect against CIP-007-6 Table R1.
technically feasible,
unnecessary (R1)
had one or more
physical
unneeded logical
input/output ports
network accessible
used for network
ports enabled. (1.1)
connectivity,
console commands,
or Removable
Media. (1.2)
The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible
R2 Operations Medium The Responsible
Entity has Entity has Entity did not
Planning Entity has
documented or documented or implement or
documented and
implemented one or implemented one or document one or
implemented one or
more process(es) for more process(es) for more process(es)
more process(es) to
patch management patch management that included the
evaluate uninstalled
but did not include but did not include applicable items in
released security
any processes, any processes for
patches for
Page 27 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
applicability but did including the installing cyber CIP-007-6 Table R2.
not evaluate the identification of security patches for (R2)
security patches for sources, for tracking applicable Cyber
OR
applicability within or evaluating cyber Assets. (2.1)
The Responsible
35 calendar days but security patches for
OR
Entity has
less than 50 applicable Cyber
The Responsible documented or
calendar days of the Assets. (2.1)
Entity has implemented one or
last evaluation for
OR
documented and more process(es) for
the source or
The Responsible implemented one or patch management
sources identified.
Entity has more process(es) to but did not include
(2.2)
documented and evaluate uninstalled any processes for
OR
implemented one or released security tracking, evaluating,
The Responsible more process(es) to patches for or installing cyber
Entity has one or evaluate uninstalled applicability but did security patches for
more documented released security not evaluate the applicable Cyber
process(es) for patches for security patches for Assets. (2.1)
evaluating cyber applicability but did applicability within
OR
security patches but, not evaluate the 65 calendar days of
3. The Responsible
in order to mitigate security patches for the last evaluation
Entity documented
the vulnerabilities applicability within for the source or
a mitigation plan for
exposed by 50 calendar days but sources identified.
an applicable cyber
applicable security less than 65 (2.2)
security patch and
patches, did not calendar days of the
OR
documented a
apply the applicable last evaluation for
The Responsible revision or
patches, create a the source or
Entity has one or extension to the
dated mitigation
more documented timeframe but did
plan, or revise an
Page 28 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
existing mitigation sources identified. process(es) for not obtain approval
plan within 35 (2.2) evaluating cyber by the CIP Senior
calendar days but security patches but, Manager or
OR
less than 50 in order to mitigate delegate. (2.4)
The Responsible
calendar days of the the vulnerabilities
OR
Entity has one or
evaluation exposed by
more documented The Responsible
completion. (2.3) applicable security
process(es) for Entity documented
patches, did not
evaluating cyber a mitigation plan for
apply the applicable
security patches but, an applicable cyber
patches, create a
in order to mitigate security patch but
dated mitigation
the vulnerabilities did not implement
plan, or revise an
exposed by the plan as created
existing mitigation
applicable security or revised within the
plan within 65
patches, did not timeframe specified
calendar days of the
apply the applicable in the plan. (2.4)
evaluation
patches, create a
completion. (2.3)
dated mitigation
plan, or revise an
existing mitigation
plan within 50
calendar days but
less than 65
calendar days of the
evaluation
completion. (2.3)
Page 29 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible
R3 Same Day Medium N/A The Responsible The Responsible
Entity has
Operations Entity has Entity did not
implemented one or
implemented one or implement or
more documented
more documented document one or
process(es) for
process(es), but, more process(es)
malicious code
where signatures or that included the
prevention but did
patterns are used, applicable items in
not mitigate the
the Responsible CIP-007-6 Table R3.
threat of detected
Entity did not (R3).
malicious code. (3.2)
address testing the
OR
signatures or OR
The Responsible
patterns. (3.3)
The Responsible
Entity has
Entity has
implemented one or
implemented one or
more documented
more documented
process(es) for
process(es) for
malicious code
malicious code
prevention but did
prevention, but
not deploy
where signatures or
method(s) to deter,
patterns are used,
detect, or prevent
the Responsible
malicious code. (3.1)
Entity did not
update malicious
code protections.
(3.3).
Page 30 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible The Responsible
R4 Same Day Medium The Responsible The Responsible
Entity has Entity did not
Operations Entity has Entity has
documented and implement or
and documented and documented and
implemented one or document one or
Operations implemented one or implemented one or
more process(es) to more process(es)
Assessment more process(es) to more process(es) to
generate alerts for that included the
identify undetected identify undetected
necessary security applicable items in
Cyber Security Cyber Security
events (as CIP-007-6 Table R4.
Incidents by Incidents by
determined by the (R4)
reviewing an entity- reviewing an entity-
responsible entity)
determined determined OR
for the Applicable
summarization or summarization or
The Responsible
Systems (per device
sampling of logged sampling of logged
Entity has
or system capability)
events at least every events at least every
documented and
but did not generate
15 calendar days but 15 calendar days but
implemented one or
alerts for all of the
missed an interval missed an interval
more process(es) to
required types of
and completed the and completed the
log events for the
events described in
review within 22 review within 30
Applicable Systems
4.2.1 through 4.2.2.
calendar days of the calendar days of the
(per device or
(4.2)
prior review. (4.4) prior review. (4.4)
system capability)
OR
but did not detect
The Responsible and log all of the
Entity has required types of
documented and events described in
implemented one or 4.1.1 through 4.1.3.
more process(es) to (4.1)
log applicable
events identified in
Page 31 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
4.1 (where
technically feasible
and except during
CIP Exceptional
Circumstances) but
did not retain
applicable event
logs for at least the
last 90 consecutive
days. (4.3)
OR
The Responsible
Entity has
documented and
implemented one or
more process(es) to
identify undetected
Cyber Security
Incidents by
reviewing an entity-
determined
summarization or
sampling of logged
events at least every
15 calendar days but
Page 32 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
missed two or more
intervals. (4.4)
R5 Operations Medium The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible
Planning Entity has Entity has Entity has Entity did not
implemented one or implemented one or implemented one or implement or
more documented more documented more documented document one or
process(es) for process(es) for process(es) for more process(es)
password-only password-only System Access that included the
authentication for authentication for Controls but, did not applicable items in
interactive user interactive user include the CIP-007-6 Table R5.
access but did not access but did not identification or (R5)
technically or technically or inventory of all
OR
procedurally enforce procedurally enforce known enabled
The Responsible
password changes password changes default or other
Entity has
or an obligation to or an obligation to generic account
implemented one or
change the change the types, either by
more documented
password within 15 password within 16 system, by groups of
process(es) for
calendar months but calendar months but systems, by location,
System Access
less than or equal to less than or equal to or by system type(s).
Controls but, where
16 calendar months 17 calendar months (5.2)
technically feasible,
of the last password of the last password
OR
does not have a
change. (5.6) change. (5.6)
The Responsible method(s) to
Entity has enforce
implemented one or authentication of
more documented interactive user
process(es) for access. (5.1)
Page 33 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
System Access OR
Controls but, did not
The Responsible
include the
Entity has
identification of the
implemented one or
individuals with
more documented
authorized access to
process(es) for
shared accounts.
System Access
(5.3)
Controls but, where
OR technically feasible,
does not have a
The Responsible
method(s) to
Entity has
enforce
implemented one or
authentication of
more documented
interactive user
process(es) for
access. (5.1)
password-only
authentication for OR
interactive user
The Responsible
access that did not
Entity has
technically or
implemented one or
procedurally enforce
more documented
one of the two
process(es) for
password
System Access
parameters as
Controls but did not,
described in 5.5.1
per device
and 5.5.2. (5.5)
capability, change
OR
Page 34 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible known default
Entity has passwords. (5.4)
implemented one or
OR
more documented
The Responsible
process(es) for
Entity has
password-only
implemented one or
authentication for
more documented
interactive user
process(es) for
access that did not
password-only
technically or
authentication for
procedurally enforce
interactive user
one of the two
access but the
password
Responsible Entity
parameters as
did not technically
described in 5.5.1
or procedurally
and 5.5.2. (5.5)
enforce all of the
OR
password
The Responsible parameters
Entity has described in 5.5.1
implemented one or and 5.5.2. (5.5)
more documented
OR
process(es) for
The Responsible
password-only
Entity has
authentication for
implemented one or
interactive user
more documented
access but did not
process(es) for
technically or
Page 35 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
procedurally enforce password-only
password changes authentication for
or an obligation to interactive user
change the access but did not
password within 17 technically or
calendar months but procedurally
less than or equal to enforce password
18 calendar months changes or an
of the last password obligation to change
change. (5.6) the password within
18 calendar months
of the last password
change. (5.6)
OR
The Responsible
Entity has
implemented one or
more documented
process(es) for
System Access
Control but, where
technically feasible,
did not either limit
the number of
unsuccessful
authentication
attempts or
Page 36 of 51
CIP-007-6 — Cyber Security – Systems Security Management
R # Time Horizon VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-007-6)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
generate alerts after
a threshold of
unsuccessful
authentication
attempts. (5.7)
Page 37 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the
requirements and to bring the
compliance elements into conformance
with the latest guidelines for developing
compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business
judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the
sentence pertaining to removing
component or system from service in
order to perform testing, in response to
FERC order issued September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of
Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
Page 38 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Version Date Action Change Tracking
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of
Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Modified to
Trustees. coordinate with
other CIP
standards and to
revise format to
use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-007-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Addressed two
Trustees. FERC directives
from Order No.
791 related to
identify, assess,
and correct
language and
communication
networks.
6 2/15/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Replaces the
Trustees. version adopted
by the Board on
11/13/2014.
Revised version
addresses
remaining
directives from
Order No. 791
related to
transient devices
and low impact
BES Cyber
Systems.
6 1/21/16 FERC order issued approving CIP-007-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
Page 39 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Section 4 – Scope of Applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Standards
Section “4. Applicability” of the standards provides important information for Responsible
Entities to determine the scope of the applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Requirements.
Section “4.1. Functional Entities” is a list of NERC functional entities to which the standard
applies. If the entity is registered as one or more of the functional entities listed in Section 4.1,
then the NERC CIP Cyber Security Standards apply. Note that there is a qualification in Section
4.1 that restricts the applicability in the case of Distribution Providers to only those that own
certain types of systems and equipment listed in 4.2.
Section “4.2. Facilities” defines the scope of the Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by
the Responsible Entity, as qualified in Section 4.1, that is subject to the requirements of the
standard. As specified in the exemption section 4.2.3.5, this standard does not apply to
Responsible Entities that do not have High Impact or Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems under
CIP-002-5.1’s categorization. In addition to the set of BES Facilities, Control Centers, and other
systems and equipment, the list includes the set of systems and equipment owned by
Distribution Providers. While the NERC Glossary term “Facilities” already includes the BES
characteristic, the additional use of the term BES here is meant to reinforce the scope of
applicability of these Facilities where it is used, especially in this applicability scoping section.
This in effect sets the scope of Facilities, systems, and equipment that is subject to the
standards.
Requirement R1:
Requirement R1 exists to reduce the attack surface of Cyber Assets by requiring entities to
disable known unnecessary ports. The SDT intends for the entity to know what network
accessible (“listening”) ports and associated services are accessible on their assets and systems,
whether they are needed for that Cyber Asset’s function, and disable or restrict access to all
other ports.
1.1. This requirement is most often accomplished by disabling the corresponding service or
program that is listening on the port or configuration settings within the Cyber Asset. It can
also be accomplished through using host-based firewalls, TCP_Wrappers, or other means on
the Cyber Asset to restrict access. Note that the requirement is applicable at the Cyber Asset
level. The Cyber Assets are those which comprise the applicable BES Cyber Systems and their
associated Cyber Assets. This control is another layer in the defense against network-based
attacks, therefore the SDT intends that the control be on the device itself, or positioned inline
in a non-bypassable manner. Blocking ports at the ESP border does not substitute for this
device level requirement. If a device has no provision for disabling or restricting logical ports
on the device (example - purpose built devices that run from firmware with no port
configuration available) then those ports that are open are deemed ‘needed.’
Page 40 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
1.2. Examples of physical I/O ports include network, serial and USB ports external to the
device casing. BES Cyber Systems should exist within a Physical Security Perimeter in which
case the physical I/O ports have protection from unauthorized access, but it may still be
possible for accidental use such as connecting a modem, connecting a network cable that
bridges networks, or inserting a USB drive. Ports used for ‘console commands’ primarily means
serial ports on Cyber Assets that provide an administrative interface.
The protection of these ports can be accomplished in several ways including, but not limited to:
 Disabling all unneeded physical ports within the Cyber Asset’s configuration
 Prominent signage, tamper tape, or other means of conveying that the ports
should not be used without proper authorization
 Physical port obstruction through removable locks
The network ports included in the scope of this requirement part are not limited to those on
the BES Cyber System itself. The scope of physical network ports includes those ports that may
exist on nonprogrammable devices such as unmanaged switches, hubs, or patch panels.
This is a ‘defense in depth’ type control and it is acknowledged that there are other layers of
control (the PSP for one) that prevent unauthorized personnel from gaining physical access to
these ports. Even with physical access, it has been pointed out there are other ways to
circumvent the control. This control, with its inclusion of means such as signage, is not meant
to be a preventative control against intruders. Signage is indeed a directive control, not a
preventative one. However, with a defense-in-depth posture, different layers and types of
controls are required throughout the standard with this providing another layer for depth in
Control Center environments. Once physical access has been achieved through the other
preventative and detective measures by authorized personnel, a directive control that outlines
proper behavior as a last line of defense is appropriate in these highest risk areas. In essence,
signage would be used to remind authorized users to “think before you plug anything into one
of these systems” which is the intent. This control is not designed primarily for intruders, but
for example the authorized employee who intends to plug his possibly infected smartphone
into an operator console USB port to charge the battery.
The Applicable Systems column was updated on CIP-007-6 Requirement 1, Part 1.2 to include
“Nonprogrammable communication components located inside both a PSP and an ESP.” This
should be interpreted to apply to only those nonprogrammable communication components
that are inside both an ESP and a PSP in combination, not those components that are in only
one perimeter as can be illustrated in the following diagram:
Page 41 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Location of Nonprogrammable
Communication Components
PSP
ESP
Applicability of CIP-007-6 R1, Part 1.2 for
Nonprogrammable Communication Components
Requirement R2:
The SDT’s intent of Requirement R2 is to require entities to know, track, and mitigate the
known software vulnerabilities associated with their BES Cyber Assets. It is not strictly an
“install every security patch” requirement; the main intention is to “be aware of in a timely
manner and manage all known vulnerabilities” requirement.
Patch management is required for BES Cyber Systems that are accessible remotely as well as
standalone systems. Standalone systems are vulnerable to intentional or unintentional
introduction of malicious code. A sound defense-in-depth security strategy employs additional
measures such as physical security, malware prevention software, and software patch
management to reduce the introduction of malicious code or the exploit of known
vulnerabilities.
One or multiple processes could be utilized. An overall assessment process may exist in a top
tier document with lower tier documents establishing the more detailed process followed for
individual systems. Lower tier documents could be used to cover BES Cyber System nuances
that may occur at the system level.
2.1. The Responsible Entity is to have a patch management program that covers tracking,
evaluating, and installing cyber security patches. The requirement applies to patches only,
which are fixes released to handle a specific vulnerability in a hardware or software product.
The requirement covers only patches that involve cyber security fixes and does not cover
patches that are purely functionality related with no cyber security impact. Tracking involves
processes for notification of the availability of new cyber security patches for the Cyber Assets.
Documenting the patch source in the tracking portion of the process is required to determine
when the assessment timeframe clock starts. This requirement handles the situation where
security patches can come from an original source (such as an operating system vendor), but
must be approved or certified by another source (such as a control system vendor) before they
Page 42 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
can be assessed and applied in order to not jeopardize the availability or integrity of the control
system. The source can take many forms. The National Vulnerability Database, Operating
System vendors, or Control System vendors could all be sources to monitor for release of
security related patches, hotfixes, and/or updates. A patch source is not required for Cyber
Assets that have no updateable software or firmware (there is no user accessible way to update
the internal software or firmware executing on the Cyber Asset), or those Cyber Assets that
have no existing source of patches such as vendors that no longer exist. The identification of
these sources is intended to be performed once unless software is changed or added to the
Cyber Asset’s baseline.
2.2. Responsible Entities are to perform an assessment of security related patches within 35
days of release from their monitored source. An assessment should consist of determination of
the applicability of each patch to the entity’s specific environment and systems. Applicability
determination is based primarily on whether the patch applies to a specific software or
hardware component that the entity does have installed in an applicable Cyber Asset. A patch
that applies to a service or component that is not installed in the entity’s environment is not
applicable. If the patch is determined to be non-applicable, that is documented with the
reasons why and the entity is compliant. If the patch is applicable, the assessment can include
a determination of the risk involved, how the vulnerability can be remediated, the urgency and
timeframe of the remediation, and the steps the entity has previously taken or will take.
Considerable care must be taken in applying security related patches, hotfixes, and/or updates
or applying compensating measures to BES Cyber System or BES Cyber Assets that are no longer
supported by vendors. It is possible security patches, hotfixes, and updates may reduce the
reliability of the system, and entities should take this into account when determining the type
of mitigation to apply. The Responsible Entities can use the information provided in the
Department of Homeland Security “Quarterly Report on Cyber Vulnerabilities of Potential Risk
to Control Systems” as a source. The DHS document “Recommended Practice for Patch
Management of Control Systems” provides guidance on an evaluative process. It uses severity
levels determined using the Common Vulnerability Scoring System Version 2. Determination
that a security related patch, hotfix, and/or update poses too great a risk to install on a system
or is not applicable due to the system configuration should not require a TFE.
When documenting the remediation plan measures it may not be necessary to document them
on a one to one basis. The remediation plan measures may be cumulative. A measure to
address a software vulnerability may involve disabling a particular service. That same service
may be exploited through other software vulnerabilities. Therefore disabling the single service
has addressed multiple patched vulnerabilities.
2.3. The requirement handles the situations where it is more of a reliability risk to patch a
running system than the vulnerability presents. In all cases, the entity either installs the patch
or documents (either through the creation of a new or update of an existing mitigation plan)
what they are going to do to mitigate the vulnerability and when they are going to do so. There
are times when it is in the best interest of reliability to not install a patch, and the entity can
document what they have done to mitigate the vulnerability. For those security related
patches that are determined to be applicable, the Responsible Entity must within 35 days either
install the patch, create a dated mitigation plan which will outline the actions to be taken or
Page 43 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
those that have already been taken by the Responsible Entity to mitigate the vulnerabilities
addressed by the security patch, or revise an existing mitigation plan. Timeframes do not have
to be designated as a particular calendar day but can have event designations such as “at next
scheduled outage of at least two days duration.” “Mitigation plans” in the standard refers to
internal documents and are not to be confused with plans that are submitted to Regional
Entities in response to violations.
2.4. The entity has been notified of, has assessed, and has developed a plan to remediate
the known risk and that plan must be implemented. Remediation plans that only include steps
that have been previously taken are considered implemented upon completion of the
documentation. Remediation plans that have steps to be taken to remediate the vulnerability
must be implemented by the timeframe the entity documented in their plan. There is no
maximum timeframe in this requirement as patching and other system changes carries its own
risk to the availability and integrity of the systems and may require waiting until a planned
outage. In periods of high demand or threatening weather, changes to systems may be
curtailed or denied due to the risk to reliability.
Requirement R3:
3.1. Due to the wide range of equipment comprising the BES Cyber Systems and the wide
variety of vulnerability and capability of that equipment to malware as well as the constantly
evolving threat and resultant tools and controls, it is not practical within the standard to
prescribe how malware is to be addressed on each Cyber Asset. Rather, the Responsible Entity
determines on a BES Cyber System basis which Cyber Assets have susceptibility to malware
intrusions and documents their plans and processes for addressing those risks and provides
evidence that they follow those plans and processes. There are numerous options available
including traditional antivirus solutions for common operating systems, white-listing solutions,
network isolation techniques, Intrusion Detection/Prevention (IDS/IPS) solutions, etc. If an
entity has numerous BES Cyber Systems or Cyber Assets that are of identical architecture, they
may provide one process that describes how all the like Cyber Assets are covered. If a specific
Cyber Asset has no updateable software and its executing code cannot be altered, then that
Cyber Asset is considered to have its own internal method of deterring malicious code.
3.2. When malicious code is detected on a Cyber Asset within the applicability of this
requirement, the threat posed by that code must be mitigated. In situations where traditional
antivirus products are used, they may be configured to automatically remove or quarantine the
malicious code. In white-listing situations, the white-listing tool itself can mitigate the threat as
it will not allow the code to execute, however steps should still be taken to remove the
malicious code from the Cyber Asset. In some instances, it may be in the best interest of
reliability to not immediately remove or quarantine the malicious code, such as when
availability of the system may be jeopardized by removal while operating and a rebuild of the
system needs to be scheduled. In that case, monitoring may be increased and steps taken to
insure the malicious code cannot communicate with other systems. In some instances the
entity may be working with law enforcement or other governmental entities to closely monitor
the code and track the perpetrator(s). For these reasons, there is no maximum timeframe or
Page 44 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
method prescribed for the removal of the malicious code, but the requirement is to mitigate
the threat posed by the now identified malicious code.
Entities should also have awareness of malware protection requirements for Transient Cyber
Assets and Removable Media (“transient devices”) in CIP-010-2. The protections required here
in CIP-007-6, Requirement R3 complement, but do not meet, the additional obligations for
transient devices.
3.3. In instances where malware detection technologies depend on signatures or patterns of
known attacks, the effectiveness of these tools against evolving threats is tied to the ability to
keep these signatures and patterns updated in a timely manner. The entity is to have a
documented process that includes the testing and installation of signature or pattern updates.
In a BES Cyber System, there may be some Cyber Assets that would benefit from the more
timely installation of the updates where availability of that Cyber Asset would not jeopardize
the availability of the BES Cyber System’s ability to perform its function. For example, some
HMI workstations where portable media is utilized may benefit from having the very latest
updates at all times with minimal testing. Other Cyber Assets should have any updates
thoroughly tested before implementation where the result of a ‘false positive’ could harm the
availability of the BES Cyber System. The testing should not negatively impact the reliability of
the BES. The testing should be focused on the update itself and if it will have an adverse impact
on the BES Cyber System. Testing in no way implies that the entity is testing to ensure that
malware is indeed detected by introducing malware into the environment. It is strictly focused
on ensuring that the update does not negatively impact the BES Cyber System before those
updates are placed into production.
Requirement R4:
Refer to NIST 800-92 and 800-137 for additional guidance in security event monitoring.
4.1. In a complex computing environment and faced with dynamic threats and
vulnerabilities, it is not practical within the standard to enumerate all security-related events
necessary to support the activities for alerting and incident response. Rather, the Responsible
Entity determines which computer generated events are necessary to log, provide alerts and
monitor for their particular BES Cyber System environment.
Specific security events already required in Version 4 of the CIP Standards carry forward in this
version. This includes access attempts at the Electronic Access Points, if any have been
identified for a BES Cyber Systems. Examples of access attempts include: (i) blocked network
access attempts, (ii) successful and unsuccessful remote user access attempts, (iii) blocked
network access attempts from a remote VPN, and (iv) successful network access attempts or
network flow information.
User access and activity events include those events generated by Cyber Assets within the
Electronic Security Perimeter that have access control capability. These types of events include:
(i) successful and unsuccessful authentication, (ii) account management, (iii) object access, and
(iv) processes started and stopped.
Page 45 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
It is not the intent of the SDT that if a device cannot log a particular event that a TFE must be
generated. The SDT’s intent is that if any of the items in the bulleted list (for example, user
logouts) can be logged by the device then the entity must log that item. If the device does not
have the capability of logging that event, the entity remains compliant.
4.2. Real-time alerting allows the cyber system to automatically communicate events of
significance to designated responders. This involves configuration of a communication
mechanism and log analysis rules. Alerts can be configured in the form of an email, text
message, or system display and alarming. The log analysis rules can exist as part of the
operating system, specific application or a centralized security event monitoring system. On
one end, a real-time alert could consist of a set point on an RTU for a login failure, and on the
other end, a security event monitoring system could provide multiple alerting communications
options triggered on any number of complex log correlation rules.
The events triggering a real-time alert may change from day to day as system administrators
and incident responders better understand the types of events that might be indications of a
cyber-security incident. Configuration of alerts also must balance the need for responders to
know an event occurred with the potential inundation of insignificant alerts. The following list
includes examples of events a Responsible Entity should consider in configuring real-time alerts:
 Detected known or potential malware or malicious activity
 Failure of security event logging mechanisms
 Login failures for critical accounts
 Interactive login of system accounts
 Enabling of accounts
 Newly provisioned accounts
 System administration or change tasks by an unauthorized user
 Authentication attempts on certain accounts during non-business hours
 Unauthorized configuration changes
 Insertion of Removable Media in violation of a policy
4.3 Logs that are created under Part 4.1 are to be retained on the applicable Cyber Assets or
BES Cyber Systems for at least 90 days. This is different than the evidence retention period
called for in the CIP standards used to prove historical compliance. For such audit purposes,
the entity should maintain evidence that shows that 90 days were kept historically. One
example would be records of disposition of event logs beyond 90 days up to the evidence
retention period.
4.4. Reviewing logs at least every 15 days (approximately every two weeks) can consist of
analyzing a summarization or sampling of logged events. NIST SP800-92 provides a lot of
guidance in periodic log analysis. If a centralized security event monitoring system is used, log
analysis can be performed top-down starting with a review of trends from summary reports.
The log review can also be an extension of the exercise in identifying those events needing real-
Page 46 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
time alerts by analyzing events that are not fully understood or could possibly inundate the
real-time alerting.
Requirement R5:
Account types referenced in this guidance typically include:
 Shared user account: An account used by multiple users for normal business functions
by employees or contractors. Usually on a device that does not support Individual User
Accounts.
 Individual user account: An account used by a single user.
 Administrative account: An account with elevated privileges for performing
administrative or other specialized functions. These can be individual or shared
accounts.
 System account: Accounts used to run services on a system (web, DNS, mail etc.). No
users have access to these accounts.
 Application account: A specific system account, with rights granted at the application
level often used for access into a Database.
 Guest account: An individual user account not typically used for normal business
functions by employees or contractors and not associated with a specific user. May or
may not be shared by multiple users.
 Remote access account: An individual user account only used for obtaining Interactive
Remote Access to the BES Cyber System.
 Generic account: A group account set up by the operating system or application to
perform specific operations. This differs from a shared user account in that individual
users do not receive authorization for access to this account type.
5.1 Reference the Requirement’s rationale.
5.2 Where possible, default and other generic accounts provided by a vendor should be
removed, renamed, or disabled prior to production use of the Cyber Asset or BES Cyber System.
If this is not possible, the passwords must be changed from the default provided by the vendor.
Default and other generic accounts remaining enabled must be documented. For common
configurations, this documentation can be performed at a BES Cyber System or more general
level.
5.3 Entities may choose to identify individuals with access to shared accounts through the
access authorization and provisioning process, in which case the individual authorization
records suffice to meet this Requirement Part. Alternatively, entities may choose to maintain a
separate listing for shared accounts. Either form of evidence achieves the end result of
maintaining control of shared accounts.
5.4. Default passwords can be commonly published in vendor documentation that is readily
available to all customers using that type of equipment and possibly published online.
Page 47 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
The requirement option to have unique password addresses cases where the Cyber Asset
generates or has assigned pseudo-random default passwords at the time of production or
installation. In these cases, the default password does not have to change because the system
or manufacturer created it specific to the Cyber Asset.
5.5. Interactive user access does not include read-only information access in which the
configuration of the Cyber Asset cannot change (e.g. front panel displays, web-based reports,
etc.). For devices that cannot technically or for operational reasons perform authentication, an
entity may demonstrate all interactive user access paths, both remote and local, are configured
for authentication. Physical security suffices for local access configuration if the physical
security can record who is in the Physical Security Perimeter and at what time.
Technical or procedural enforcement of password parameters are required where passwords
are the only credential used to authenticate individuals. Technical enforcement of the password
parameters means a Cyber Asset verifies an individually selected password meets the required
parameters before allowing the account to authenticate with the selected password. Technical
enforcement should be used in most cases when the authenticating Cyber Asset supports
enforcing password parameters. Likewise, procedural enforcement means requiring the
password parameters through procedures. Individuals choosing the passwords have the
obligation of ensuring the password meets the required parameters.
Password complexity refers to the policy set by a Cyber Asset to require passwords to have one
or more of the following types of characters: (1) lowercase alphabetic, (2) uppercase
alphabetic, (3) numeric, and (4) non-alphanumeric or “special” characters (e.g. #, $, @, &), in
various combinations.
5.6 Technical or procedural enforcement of password change obligations are required
where passwords are the only credential used to authenticate individuals. Technical
enforcement of password change obligations means the Cyber Asset requires a password
change after a specified timeframe prior to allowing access. In this case, the password is not
required to change by the specified time as long as the Cyber Asset enforces the password
change after the next successful authentication of the account. Procedural enforcement means
manually changing passwords used for interactive user access after a specified timeframe.
5.7 Configuring an account lockout policy or alerting after a certain number of failed
authentication attempts serves to prevent unauthorized access through an online password
guessing attack. The threshold of failed authentication attempts should be set high enough to
avoid false-positives from authorized users failing to authenticate. It should also be set low
enough to account for online password attacks occurring over an extended period of time. This
threshold may be tailored to the operating environment over time to avoid unnecessary
account lockouts.
Entities should take caution when configuring account lockout to avoid locking out accounts
necessary for the BES Cyber System to perform a BES reliability task. In such cases, entities
should configure authentication failure alerting.
Page 48 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Rationale:
During development of this standard, text boxes were embedded within the standard to explain
the rationale for various parts of the standard. Upon BOT approval, the text from the rationale
text boxes was moved to this section.
Rationale for Requirement R1:
The requirement is intended to minimize the attack surface of BES Cyber Systems through
disabling or limiting access to unnecessary network accessible logical ports and services and
physical I/O ports.
In response to FERC Order No. 791, specifically FERC’s reference to NIST 800-53 rev. 3 security
control PE-4 in paragraph 149, Part 1.2 has been expanded to include PCAs and
nonprogrammable communications components. This increase in applicability expands the
scope of devices that receive the protection afforded by the defense-in-depth control included
in Requirement R1, Part 1.2.
The applicability is limited to those nonprogrammable communications components located
both inside a PSP and an ESP in order to allow for a scenario in which a Responsible Entity may
implement an extended ESP (with corresponding logical protections identified in CIP-006,
Requirement R1, Part 1.10). In this scenario, nonprogrammable components of the
communication network may exist out of the Responsible Entity’s control (i.e. as part of the
telecommunication carrier’s network).
Rationale for Requirement R2:
Security patch management is a proactive way of monitoring and addressing known security
vulnerabilities in software before those vulnerabilities can be exploited in a malicious manner
to gain control of or render a BES Cyber Asset or BES Cyber System inoperable.
Rationale for Requirement R3:
Malicious code prevention has the purpose of limiting and detecting the addition of malicious
code onto the applicable Cyber Assets of a BES Cyber System. Malicious code (viruses, worms,
botnets, targeted code such as Stuxnet, etc.) may compromise the availability or integrity of the
BES Cyber System.
Rationale for Requirement R4:
Security event monitoring has the purpose of detecting unauthorized access, reconnaissance
and other malicious activity on BES Cyber Systems, and comprises of the activities involved with
the collection, processing, alerting and retention of security-related computer logs. These logs
can provide both (1) the detection of an incident and (2) useful evidence in the investigation of
an incident. The retention of security-related logs is intended to support post-event data
analysis.
Audit processing failures are not penalized in this requirement. Instead, the requirement
specifies processes which must be in place to monitor for and notify personnel of audit
processing failures.
Page 49 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Rationale for Requirement R5:
To help ensure that no authorized individual can gain electronic access to a BES Cyber System
until the individual has been authenticated, i.e., until the individual's logon credentials have
been validated. Requirement R5 also seeks to reduce the risk that static passwords, where
used as authenticators, may be compromised.
Requirement Part 5.1 ensures the BES Cyber System or Cyber Asset authenticates individuals
that can modify configuration information. This requirement addresses the configuration of
authentication. The authorization of individuals is addressed elsewhere in the CIP Cyber
Security Standards. Interactive user access does not include read-only information access in
which the configuration of the Cyber Asset cannot change (e.g. front panel displays, web-based
reports, etc.). For devices that cannot technically or for operational reasons perform
authentication, an entity may demonstrate all interactive user access paths, both remote and
local, are configured for authentication. Physical security suffices for local access configuration
if the physical security can record who is in the Physical Security Perimeter and at what time.
Requirement Part 5.2 addresses default and other generic account types. Identifying the use of
default or generic account types that could introduce vulnerabilities has the benefit ensuring
entities understand the possible risk these accounts pose to the BES Cyber System. The
Requirement Part avoids prescribing an action to address these accounts because the most
effective solution is situation specific, and in some cases, removing or disabling the account
could have reliability consequences.
Requirement Part 5.3 addresses identification of individuals with access to shared accounts.
This Requirement Part has the objective of mitigating the risk of unauthorized access through
shared accounts. This differs from other CIP Cyber Security Standards Requirements to
authorize access. An entity can authorize access and still not know who has access to a shared
account. Failure to identify individuals with access to shared accounts would make it difficult to
revoke access when it is no longer needed. The term “authorized” is used in the requirement to
make clear that individuals storing, losing, or inappropriately sharing a password is not a
violation of this requirement.
Requirement 5.4 addresses default passwords. Changing default passwords closes an easily
exploitable vulnerability in many systems and applications. Pseudo-randomly system generated
passwords are not considered default passwords.
For password-based user authentication, using strong passwords and changing them
periodically helps mitigate the risk of successful password cracking attacks and the risk of
accidental password disclosure to unauthorized individuals. In these requirements, the drafting
team considered multiple approaches to ensuring this requirement was both effective and
flexible enough to allow Responsible Entities to make good security decisions. One of the
approaches considered involved requiring minimum password entropy, but the calculation for
true information entropy is more highly complex and makes several assumptions in the
passwords users choose. Users can pick poor passwords well below the calculated minimum
entropy.
Page 50 of 51
Guidelines and Technical Basis
The drafting team also chose to not require technical feasibility exceptions for devices that
cannot meet the length and complexity requirements in password parameters. The objective
of this requirement is to apply a measurable password policy to deter password cracking
attempts, and replacing devices to achieve a specified password policy does not meet this
objective. At the same time, this requirement has been strengthened to require account
lockout or alerting for failed login attempts, which in many instances better meets the
requirement objective.
The requirement to change passwords exists to address password cracking attempts if an
encrypted password were somehow attained and also to refresh passwords which may have
been accidentally disclosed over time. The requirement permits the entity to specify the
periodicity of change to accomplish this objective. Specifically, the drafting team felt
determining the appropriate periodicity based on a number of factors is more effective than
specifying the period for every BES Cyber System in the Standard. In general, passwords for
user authentication should be changed at least annually. The periodicity may increase in some
cases. For example, application passwords that are long and pseudo-randomly generated could
have a very long periodicity. Also, passwords used only as a weak form of application
authentication, such as accessing the configuration of a relay may only need to be changed as
part of regularly scheduled maintenance.
The Cyber Asset should automatically enforce the password policy for individual user accounts.
However, for shared accounts in which no mechanism exists to enforce password policies, the
Responsible Entity can enforce the password policy procedurally and through internal
assessment and audit.
Requirement Part 5.7 assists in preventing online password attacks by limiting the number of
guesses an attacker can make. This requirement allows either limiting the number of failed
authentication attempts or alerting after a defined number of failed authentication attempts.
Entities should take caution in choosing to limit the number of failed authentication attempts
for all accounts because this would allow the possibility for a denial of service attack on the BES
Cyber System.
Page 51 of 51
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-007-6.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-011-3.pdf ---
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Information Protection
2. Number: CIP-011-3
3. Purpose: To prevent unauthorized access to BES Cyber System Information (BCSI) by
specifying information protection requirements in support of protecting BES Cyber
Systems against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk
Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load
shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above
are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements in
a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-011-3:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters.
4.2.3.3 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
Page 2 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
4.2.3.4 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not
included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact according to
the CIP-002-5.1a identification and categorization processes.
5. Effective Dates: See Implementation Plan for CIP-011-3.
6. Background: Standard CIP-011 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber
security, which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems
and require a minimum level of organizational, operational, and procedural controls to
mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements. An
entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes, but
it must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident response
plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an approach involving
multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the standards
include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training program.
The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be referred to as
a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any additional
requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES Cyber
Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes themselves.
Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show documentation and
Page 3 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
implementation of applicable items in the documented processes. These measures
serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of compliance and should
not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the requirements
and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered items are items that
are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version 1
of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the BES. A
review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability standards for UFLS program
requirements to date indicates that the historical value of 300 MW represents an
adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems
to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management
Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact and
connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used in the “Applicable
Systems” column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002-5.1a identification and categorization
processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP-002-5.1a identification and categorization
processes.
• Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced high
impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples may
include, but are not limited to, firewalls, authentication servers, and log
monitoring and alerting systems.
• Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access Control
System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium
impact BES Cyber System with External Routable Connectivity.
• Protected Cyber Assets (PCA) – Applies to each Protected Cyber Asset associated
with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber
System.
Page 4 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented information protection program(s) for BES Cyber System
Information (BCSI) pertaining to “Applicable Systems” identified in CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
that collectively includes each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program.
[Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M1. Evidence for the information protection program must include the applicable requirement parts in CIP-011-3 Table R1 –
Information Protection Program and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures
column of the table.
CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Method(s) to identify BCSI. Examples of acceptable evidence may
their associated: include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. EACMS; and
• Documented method(s) to identify
2. PACS
BCSI from the entity’s information
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
protection program; or
and their associated:
• Indications on information (e.g.,
1. EACMS; and
labels or classification) that identify
BCSI as designated in the entity’s
2. PACS
information protection program; or
• Training materials that provide
personnel with sufficient
knowledge to identify BCSI; or
• Storage locations identified for
housing BCSI in the entity’s
information protection program.
Page 6 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Method(s) to protect and securely Examples of evidence for on-premise
their associated: handle BCSI to mitigate risks of BCSI may include, but are not limited
compromising confidentiality. to, the following:
1. EACMS; and
• Procedures for protecting and
2. PACS
securely handling, which
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
include topics such as storage,
and their associated:
security during transit, and use
of BCSI; or
1. EACMS; and
• Records indicating that BCSI is
2. PACS
handled in a manner consistent
with the entity’s documented
procedure(s).
Examples of evidence for off-premise
BCSI may include, but are not limited
to, the following:
• Implementation of electronic
technical method(s) to protect
electronic BCSI (e.g., data
masking, encryption, hashing,
tokenization, cipher, electronic
key management); or
• Implementation of physical
technical method(s) to protect
physical BCSI (e.g., physical lock
and key management, physical
badge management,
biometrics, alarm system); or
Page 7 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
• Implementation of
administrative method(s) to
protect BCSI (e.g., vendor
service risk assessments,
business agreements).
Page 8 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-011-3 Table R2 – BES Cyber Asset Reuse and Disposal. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon:
Operations Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-011-3 Table R2 – BES Cyber Asset Reuse and Disposal and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-011-3 Table R2 – BES Cyber Asset Reuse and Disposal
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
Prior to the release for reuse of
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Examples of acceptable evidence may
applicable Cyber Assets that contain
their associated: include, but are not limited to, the
BCSI (except for reuse within other
following:
1. EACMS;
systems identified in the “Applicable
Systems” column), the Responsible
• Records tracking sanitization actions
2. PACS; and
taken to prevent unauthorized
Entity shall take action to prevent the
3. PCA
retrieval of BCSI such as clearing,
unauthorized retrieval of BCSI from
purging, or destroying; or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems the Cyber Asset data storage media.
and their associated:
• Records tracking actions such as
encrypting, retaining in the Physical
1. EACMS;
Security Perimeter or other methods
2. PACS; and
used to prevent unauthorized
3. PCA retrieval of BCSI.
Page 9 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
CIP-011-3 Table R2 – BES Cyber Asset Reuse and Disposal
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Prior to the disposal of applicable Examples of acceptable evidence may
their associated: Cyber Assets that contain BCSI, the include, but are not limited to, the
Responsible Entity shall take action to following:
1. EACMS;
prevent the unauthorized retrieval of
• Records that indicate that data
2. PACS; and BCSI from the Cyber Asset or destroy
storage media was destroyed
the data storage media.
3. PCA prior to the disposal of an
applicable Cyber Asset; or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
• Records of actions taken to
and their associated:
prevent unauthorized retrieval of
1. EACMS;
BCSI prior to the disposal of an
applicable Cyber Asset.
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 10 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
B. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring and/or
enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in
their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period
of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is
shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide
other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last
audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of
time as part of an investigation:
• The applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard
for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the
time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
Page 11 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-011-3)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Operations Medium N/A N/A The Responsible The Responsible
Planning Entity documented, Entity neither
but did not, documented nor
implement one or implemented one or
more BCSI protection more BCSI protection
program(s). (R1) program(s). (R1)
OR
The Responsible
Entity documented
but did not
implement at least
one method to
identify BCSI. (1.1)
OR
The Responsible
Entity documented
but did not
implement at least
one method to
protect and securely
handle BCSI. (1.2)
R2 Operations Lower N/A The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible
Planning Entity implemented Entity implemented Entity has not
one or more one or more documented or
documented documented implemented any
Page 12 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-011-3)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
processes but did processes but did processes for
not include not include disposal applicable
processes for reuse or media destruction requirement parts in
as to prevent the processes to prevent CIP-011-3 Table R3 –
unauthorized the unauthorized BES Cyber Asset
retrieval of BCSI retrieval of BCSI Reuse and Disposal.
from the BES Cyber from the BES Cyber (R2)
Asset. (2.1) Asset. (2.2)
Page 13 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
C. Regional Variances
None.
D. Interpretations
None.
E. Associated Documents
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Developed to define the
Trustees. information protection
requirements in coordination
with other CIP standards and
to address the balance of the
FERC directives in its Order
706.
1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
011-1. (Order becomes effective
on 2/3/14.)
2 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Addressed two FERC directives
Trustees. from Order No. 791 related to
identify, assess, and correct
language and communication
networks.
2 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Replaces the version adopted
Trustees. by the Board on 11/13/2014.
Revised version addresses
remaining directives from
Order No. 791 related to
transient devices and low
impact BES Cyber Systems.
2 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
011-2. Docket No. RM15-14-000
Revised to enhance BES
3 8/12/21 Adopted by the NERC Board of
reliability for entities to manage
Trustees
their BCSI.
Page 14 of 14
Version Date Action Change Tracking
“A Responsible Entity may elect
3 12/7/21 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
to comply with the requirements
011-3 Docket No. RD21-6-000
in CIP-004-7 and CIP-011-3
following their approval by the
applicable governmental
authority, but prior to their
Effective Date. In such a case, the
Responsible Entity shall notify the
applicable Regional Entities of
the date of compliance with the
CIP-004-7 and CIP-011-3
Reliability Standards. Responsible
Entities must comply with CIP-
004-6 and CIP-011-2 until that
date.”
Page 14 of 14
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-011-3.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-009-7.pdf ---
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
2. Number: CIP-009-7
3. Purpose: To recover reliability functions performed by BES Cyber Systems (BCS) by
specifying recovery plan requirements in support of the continued
stability, operability, and reliability of the Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
Page 1 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in
this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset
of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-009-7:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
Page 2 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to
one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to define
the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan”.
Page 3 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more documented recovery plan(s) that collectively include each of the
applicable Requirement Parts in CIP-009-7 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M1. Evidence must include the documented recovery plan(s) that collectively include the applicable Requirement Parts in CIP-
009-7 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications.
CIP-009-7 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Conditions for activation of the recovery An example of evidence may include, but is
plan(s). not limited to, one or more plans that
1. Electronic Access Control and
include language identifying conditions for
Monitoring Systems (EACMS); and
activation of the recovery plan(s).
2. Physical Access Control Systems
(PACS)
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Roles and responsibilities of responders. Examples of evidence may include, but are
1. EACMS; and not limited to, one or more recovery plans
that include language identifying the roles
2. PACS
and responsibilities of responders.
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.3 High impact BCS and their associated: One or more processes for the backup and An example of evidence may include, but is
storage of information required to recover not limited to, documentation of specific
1. EACMS; and
Applicable System functionality. processes for the backup and storage of
2. PACS
information required to recover Applicable
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
System functionality.
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.4 One or more processes to verify the Examples of evidence may include, but are
High impact BCS and their associated:
Page 4 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-7 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1. EACMS; and successful completion of the backup not limited to, logs, workflow or other
processes in Part 1.3 and to address any documentation confirming that the backup
2. PACS
backup failures. process completed successfully and backup
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and
failures, if any, were addressed.
their associated:
1. EACMS; and PACS
1.5 One or more processes to preserve data, Examples of evidence may include, but are
High impact BCS and their associated:
per system capability, for determining the not limited to, procedures to preserve
1. EACMS; and
cause of a Cyber Security Incident that data, such as preserving a corrupted drive
2. PACS
triggers activation of the recovery plan(s). or making a data mirror of the system
Medium impact BCS and their associated: Data preservation should not impede or before proceeding with recovery.
1. EACMS; and restrict recovery.
2. PACS
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
part
Page 5 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement its documented recovery plan(s) to collectively include each of the applicable
Requirement Parts in CIP-009-7 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning and Real-time Operations.]
M2. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates implementation of each of the
applicable Requirement Parts in CIP-009-7 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing.
CIP-009-7 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Test each of the recovery plans referenced Examples of evidence may include, but are
in Requirement R1 at least once every 15 not limited to, dated evidence of a test (by
1. EACMS; and
calendar months: recovering from an actual incident, with a
2. PACS
paper drill or tabletop exercise, or with an
• By recovering from an actual incident;
operational exercise) of the recovery plan
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and
• With a paper drill or tabletop exercise;
at least once every 15 calendar months.
their associated:
or
For the paper drill or full operational
1. EACMS; and
• With an operational exercise. exercise, evidence may include meeting
2. PACS notices, minutes, or other records of
exercise findings.
2.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Test a representative sample of Examples of evidence may include, but are
information used to recover Applicable not limited to, operational logs or test
1. EACMS; and
System functionality at least once every 15 results with criteria for testing the usability
2. PACS
calendar months to ensure that the (e.g., sample tape load, browsing tape
information is useable and is compatible contents) and compatibility with current
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and
with current configurations. system configurations (e.g., manual, or
their associated:
automated comparison checkpoints
1. EACMS; and An actual recovery that incorporates the
between backup media contents and
information used to recover Applicable
2. PACS current configuration).
System functionality substitutes for this
test.
2.3 High impact BCS Test each of the recovery plans referenced Examples of evidence may include, but are
in Requirement R1 at least once every 36 not limited to, dated documentation of:
calendar months through an operational
• An operational exercise at least once
exercise of the recovery plans in an
every 36 calendar months between
environment representative of the
exercises, that demonstrates recovery
production environment.
in a representative environment; or
Page 6 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-7 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
• An actual recovery response that
occurred within the 36 calendar month
An actual recovery response may
timeframe that exercised the recovery
substitute for an operational exercise.
plans.
Page 7 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall maintain each of its recovery plan(s) in accordance with each of the applicable Requirement Parts
in CIP-009-7 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon:
Operations Assessment].
M3. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, each of the Applicable Requirement parts in CIP-009-7 Table R3 – Recovery
Plan Review, Update and Communication.
CIP-009-7 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High impact BCS and their associated: No later than 90 calendar days after Examples of evidence may include, but are
completion of a recovery plan test or actual not limited to, all of the following:
1. EACMS; and
recovery:
2. PACS
1. Dated documentation of identified
3.1.1. Document any lessons learned deficiencies or lessons learned for
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and
associated with a recovery plan each recovery plan test or actual
their associated:
test or actual recovery or incident recovery or dated
1. EACMS; and
document the absence of any documentation stating there were no
2. PACS lessons learned; lessons learned;
3.1.2. Update the recovery plan based on 2. Dated and revised recovery plan
any documented lessons learned showing any changes based on the
associated with the plan; and lessons learned; and
3.1.3. Notify each person or group with a 3. Evidence of plan update distribution
defined role in the recovery plan of including, but not limited to:
the updates to the recovery plan
• Emails;
based on any documented lessons
• USPS or other mail service;
learned.
• Electronic distribution system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
3.2 High impact BCS and their associated: No later than 60 calendar days after a Examples of evidence may include, but are
change to the roles or responsibilities, not limited to, all of the following:
1. EACMS; and
responders, or technology that the
1. Dated and revised recovery plan with
2. PACS
Responsible Entity determines would
changes to the roles or
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and impact the ability to execute the recovery
responsibilities, responders, or
their associated: plan:
technology; and
1. EACMS; and 3.2.1. Update the recovery plan; and
2. Evidence of plan update distribution
2. PACS 3.2.2. Notify each person or group with a including, but not limited to:
Page 8 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-7 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
defined role in the recovery plan of • Emails;
the updates.
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 9 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing
compliance with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required to
retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence
retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may
ask an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period
since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified below
unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as part of an
investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard for
three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the
non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time specified
above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent
audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
• Compliance Audits
• Self-Certifications
• Spot Checking
• Compliance Investigations
• Self-Reporting
• Complaints
1.4. Additional Compliance Information: None
Page 10 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 N/A The Responsible Entity’s The Responsible Entity plan(s) The Responsible Entity did not
plan(s) did not address one of did not address two of the create recovery plan(s) for
the requirements included in requirements included in Parts Applicable Systems.
Parts 1.2 through 1.5. 1.2 through 1.5.
OR
The Responsible Entity plan(s)
did not address the conditions
for activation in Part 1.1.
OR
The Responsible Entity plan(s)
did not address three or more
of the requirements in Parts
1.2 through 1.5.
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not
test the recovery plan(s) test the recovery plan(s) not test the recovery plan(s) test the recovery plan(s)
according to Part 2.1 within within 16 calendar months, according to Part 2.1 within according to Part 2.1 within 18
15 calendar months, not not exceeding 17 calendar 17 calendar months, not calendar months between
exceeding 16 calendar months between tests of the exceeding 18 calendar tests of the plan. (Part 2.1)
months between tests of the plan. (Part 2.1) months between tests of the
OR
plan(s). (Part 2.1) plan. (Part 2.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did not test a representative sample
The Responsible Entity did not test a representative sample The Responsible Entity did not of the information used in the
test a representative sample of the information used in the test a representative sample recovery of Applicable System
of the information used in the recovery of Applicable System of the information used in the functionality according to Part
recovery of Applicable System functionality according to Part recovery of Applicable System 2.2 within 18 calendar months
functionality according to Part 2.2 within 16 calendar functionality according to Part between tests. (Part 2.2)
2.2 within 15 calendar months, not exceeding 17 2.2 within 17 calendar
OR
months, not exceeding 16 calendar months between months, not exceeding 18
tests. (Part 2.2) The Responsible Entity did not
test the recovery plan(s)
Page 11 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
calendar months between OR calendar months between according to Part 2.3 within 39
tests. (Part 2.2) tests. (Part 2.2) calendar months between
The Responsible Entity did not
tests of the plan(s). (Part 2.3)
OR test the recovery plan OR
according to Part 2.3 within
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
37 calendar months, not
test the recovery plan test the recovery plan
exceeding 38 calendar
according to Part 2.3 within according to Part 2.3 within
months between tests. (Part
36 calendar months, not 38 calendar months, not
2.3)
exceeding 37 calendar exceeding 39 calendar
months between tests. (Part months between tests. (Part
2.3) 2.3)
R3 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity neither The Responsible Entity neither
notify each person or group update the recovery plan(s) documented lessons learned documented lessons learned
with a defined role in the based on any documented nor documented the absence nor documented the absence
recovery plan(s) of updates lessons learned within 90 and of any lessons learned within of any lessons learned within
within 90 and less than 120 less than 120 calendar days of 90 and less than 120 calendar 120 calendar days of each
calendar days of the update each recovery plan test or days of each recovery plan test recovery plan test or actual
being completed. (Part 3.1.3) actual recovery. (Part 3.1.2) or actual recovery. (Part 3.1.1) recovery. (Part 3.1.1)
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
notify each person or group update the recovery plan(s)
with a defined role in the based on any documented
recovery plan(s) of updates lessons learned within 120
within 120 calendar days of the calendar days of each recovery
update being completed. (Part plan test or actual recovery.
3.1.3) (Part 3.1.2)
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
update the recovery plan(s) or update the recovery plan(s) or
notified each person or group notified each person or group
with a defined role within 60 with a defined role within 90
and less than 90 calendar days calendar days of any of the
Page 12 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
of any of the following changes following changes that the
that the responsible entity responsible entity determines
determines would impact the would impact the ability to
ability to execute the plan: execute the plan:
• Roles or responsibilities, or • Roles or responsibilities, or
• Responders, or • Responders, or
• Technology changes. (Part • Technology changes. (Part
3.2) (3.2)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-009-7 Technical Rationale
Page 13 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Version History
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to 3/24/06
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements
and to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or
system from service in order to perform
testing, in response to FERC order issued
September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP
standards and to
revise format to
use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-009-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed FERC
directives from
Order No. 791
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-009-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
Page 14 of 14
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-009-7.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-004-7.pdf ---
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Personnel & Training
2. Number: CIP-004-7
3. Purpose: To minimize the risk against compromise that could lead to misoperation or
instability in the Bulk Electric System (BES) from individuals accessing BES Cyber Systems by
requiring an appropriate level of personnel risk assessment, training, security awareness,
and access management in support of protecting BES Cyber Systems.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load
shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity, without
human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above
are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity, without
human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements in a
NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All BES
Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-004-7:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters.
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant
to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
Page 2 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not
included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact according to
the CIP-002-5.1a identification and categorization processes.
5. Effective Dates: See Implementation Plan for CIP-004-7.
6. Background: Standard CIP-004 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber
security, which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems and
require a minimum level of organizational, operational, and procedural controls to mitigate
risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table Reference].”
The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for the common
subject matter of the requirements.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements. An
entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes, but it
must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes where it
makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented processes describing
a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident response plans and recovery
plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an approach involving multiple procedures to
address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of its
policies, plans and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the standards
include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training program. The
full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be referred to as a
program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any additional requirements
beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for multiple
high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training program could
meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes themselves.
Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show documentation and
implementation of applicable items in the documented processes. These measures serve to
provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of compliance and should not be viewed
Page 3 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the requirements and
measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered items are items that are
linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and UVLS.
This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version 1 of the CIP
Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is specifically
addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the BES. A review of UFLS
tolerances defined within regional reliability standards for UFLS program requirements to
date indicates that the historical value of 300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable
threshold value for allowable UFLS operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems to
which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept from the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management Framework as a
way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact and connectivity
characteristics. The following conventions are used in the “Applicable Systems” column as
described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as high
impact according to the CIP-002-5.1a identification and categorization processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP-002-5.1a identification and categorization
processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity – Only applies
to medium impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity. This also
excludes Cyber Assets in the BES Cyber System that cannot be directly accessed through
External Routable Connectivity.
• Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each Electronic
Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced high impact BES
Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples may include, but are not
limited to, firewalls, authentication servers, and log monitoring and alerting systems.
• Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access Control
System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact
BES Cyber System with External Routable Connectivity.
Page 4 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-7 Table R1 – Security Awareness Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-004-7 Table R1 – Security Awareness Program and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-004-7 Table R1 – Security Awareness Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems Security awareness that, at least once An example of evidence may include,
each calendar quarter, reinforces cyber but is not limited to, documentation
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
security practices (which may include that the quarterly reinforcement has
associated physical security practices) been provided. Examples of evidence
for the Responsible Entity’s personnel of reinforcement may include, but are
who have authorized electronic or not limited to, dated copies of
authorized unescorted physical access information used to reinforce security
to BES Cyber Systems. awareness, as well as evidence of
distribution, such as:
• direct communications (for
example, e-mails, memos,
computer-based training); or
• indirect communications (for
example, posters, intranet, or
brochures); or
• management support and
reinforcement (for example,
presentations or meetings).
Page 5 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more cyber security training program(s) appropriate to individual roles,
functions, or responsibilities that collectively includes each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-7 Table R2 –
Cyber Security Training Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M2. Evidence must include the training program that includes each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-7 Table R2 –
Cyber Security Training Program and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation of the program(s).
CIP-004-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Training Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Training content on: Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: are not limited to, training material such
2.1.1. Cyber security policies;
as power point presentations, instructor
1. EACMS; and
2.1.2. Physical access controls;
notes, student notes, handouts, or other
2. PACS
training materials.
2.1.3. Electronic access controls;
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
2.1.4. The visitor control program;
with External Routable Connectivity
2.1.5. Handling of BES Cyber System
and their associated:
Information and its storage;
1. EACMS; and
2.1.6. Identification of a Cyber
2. PACS
Security Incident and initial
notifications in accordance with
the entity’s incident response
plan;
2.1.7. Recovery plans for BES Cyber
Systems;
2.1.8. Response to Cyber Security
Incidents; and
2.1.9. Cyber security risks associated
with a BES Cyber System’s
electronic interconnectivity and
interoperability with other
Cyber Assets, including
Page 6 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Training Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
Transient Cyber Assets, and
with Removable Media.
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Require completion of the training Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: specified in Part 2.1 prior to granting are not limited to, training records and
authorized electronic access and documentation of when CIP Exceptional
1. EACMS; and
authorized unescorted physical access Circumstances were invoked.
2. PACS
to applicable Cyber Assets, except
during CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
with External Routable Connectivity
and their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Require completion of the training Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: specified in Part 2.1 at least once every are not limited to, dated individual
15 calendar months. training records.
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
with External Routable Connectivity
and their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Page 7 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented personnel risk assessment program(s) to attain and
retain authorized electronic or authorized unescorted physical access to BES Cyber Systems that collectively include each of
the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-7 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M3. Evidence must include the documented personnel risk assessment programs that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-004-7 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation of the program(s).
CIP-004-7 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Process to confirm identity. An example of evidence may include,
their associated: but is not limited to, documentation of
the Responsible Entity’s process to
1. EACMS; and
confirm identity.
2. PACS
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
3.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Process to perform a seven year An example of evidence may include,
their associated: criminal history records check as part of but is not limited to, documentation of
each personnel risk assessment that the Responsible Entity’s process to
1. EACMS; and
includes: perform a seven year criminal history
2. PACS
records check.
3.2.1. current residence, regardless of
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
duration; and
External Routable Connectivity and
3.2.2. other locations where, during
their associated:
the seven years immediately prior to
1. EACMS; and
the date of the criminal history
records check, the subject has resided
Page 8 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-7 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
for six consecutive months or more.
2. PACS
If it is not possible to perform a full
seven year criminal history records
check, conduct as much of the seven
year criminal history records check as
possible and document the reason the
full seven year criminal history records
check could not be performed.
3.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Criteria or process to evaluate criminal An example of evidence may include,
their associated: history records checks for authorizing but is not limited to, documentation of
access. the Responsible Entity’s process to
1. EACMS; and
evaluate criminal history records
2. PACS
checks.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
3.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Criteria or process for verifying that An example of evidence may include,
their associated: personnel risk assessments performed but is not limited to, documentation of
for contractors or service vendors are the Responsible Entity’s criteria or
1. EACMS; and
conducted according to Parts 3.1 process for verifying contractors or
2. PACS
through 3.3. service vendors personnel risk
assessments.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
Page 9 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-7 Table R3 – Personnel Risk Assessment Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2. PACS
3.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Process to ensure that individuals with An example of evidence may include,
their associated: authorized electronic or authorized but is not limited to, documentation of
unescorted physical access have had a the Responsible Entity’s process for
1. EACMS; and
personnel risk assessment completed ensuring that individuals with
2. PACS
according to Parts 3.1 to 3.4 within the authorized electronic or authorized
last seven years. unescorted physical access have had a
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
personnel risk assessment completed
External Routable Connectivity and
within the last seven years.
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Page 10 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R4. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented access management program(s) that collectively
include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-7 Table R4 – Access Management Program. [Violation Risk
Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M4. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
004-7 Table R4 – Access Management Program and additional evidence to demonstrate that the access management
program was implemented as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-004-7 Table R4 – Access Management Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Process to authorize based on need, An example of evidence may include,
associated: as determined by the Responsible but is not limited to, dated
Entity, except for CIP Exceptional documentation of the process to
1. EACMS; and
Circumstances: authorize electronic access, and
2. PACS
unescorted physical access in a
4.1.1. Electronic access; and
Physical Security Perimeter.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
4.1.2. Unescorted physical access
External Routable Connectivity and their
into a Physical Security
associated:
Perimeter
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
4.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Verify at least once each calendar Examples of evidence may include,
associated: quarter that individuals with active but are not limited to:
electronic access or unescorted
1. EACMS; and • Dated documentation of the
physical access have authorization
verification between the system
2. PACS
records.
generated list of individuals who
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
have been authorized for access
External Routable Connectivity and their
(i.e., workflow database) and a
associated:
system generated list of
personnel who have access (i.e.,
1. EACMS; and
user account listing), or
2. PACS
Dated documentation of the
Page 11 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-7 Table R4 – Access Management Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
verification between a list of
individuals who have been
authorized for access (i.e.,
authorization forms) and a list of
individuals provisioned for access
(i.e., provisioning forms or shared
account listing).
4.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their For electronic access, verify at least An example of evidence may include,
associated: once every 15 calendar months that but is not limited to, documentation
all user accounts, user account of the review that includes all of the
1. EACMS; and
groups, or user role categories, and following:
2. PACS
their specific, associated privileges are
1. A dated listing of all
correct and are those that the
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
accounts/account groups or
Responsible Entity determines are
External Routable Connectivity and their
roles within the system;
necessary.
associated:
2. A summary description of
1. EACMS; and
privileges associated with
each group or role;
2. PACS
3. Accounts assigned to the
group or role; and
Dated evidence showing verification
of the privileges for the group are
authorized and appropriate to the
work function performed by people
assigned to each account.
Page 12 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R5. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented access revocation program(s) that collectively include
each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-004-7 Table R5 – Access Revocation. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Same Day Operations and Operations Planning].
M5. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented programs that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-004-7 Table R5 – Access Revocation and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-004-7 Table R5 – Access Revocation
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
5.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and A process to initiate removal of an An example of evidence may include,
their associated: individual’s ability for unescorted but is not limited to, documentation of
physical access and Interactive Remote all of the following:
1. EACMS; and
Access upon a termination action, and
1. Dated workflow or sign-off form
2. PACS
complete the removals within 24 hours
verifying access removal
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
of the termination action (Removal of
associated with the termination
with External Routable Connectivity
the ability for access may be different
action; and
and their associated:
than deletion, disabling, revocation, or
Logs or other demonstration showing
1. EACMS; and removal of all access rights).
such persons no longer have access.
2. PACS
5.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and For reassignments or transfers, revoke An example of evidence may include,
their associated: the individual’s authorized electronic but is not limited to, documentation of
access to individual accounts and all of the following:
1. EACMS; and
authorized unescorted physical access
1. Dated workflow or sign-off form
2. PACS
that the Responsible Entity determines
showing a review of logical and
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
are not necessary by the end of the
physical access; and
with External Routable Connectivity
next calendar day following the date
Logs or other demonstration showing
and their associated:
that the Responsible Entity determines
such persons no longer have access
1. EACMS; and that the individual no longer requires
that the Responsible Entity determines
retention of that access.
2. PACS
is not necessary.
5.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and For termination actions, revoke the An example of evidence may include,
their associated: individual’s non-shared user accounts but is not limited to, workflow or sign-
Page 13 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-7 Table R5 – Access Revocation
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
• EACMS (unless already revoked according to off form showing access removal for
Part 5.1) within 30 calendar days of the any individual BES Cyber Assets and
effective date of the termination software applications as determined
action. necessary to completing the revocation
of access and dated within thirty
calendar days of the termination
actions.
5.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and For termination actions, change Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: passwords for shared account(s) known are not limited to:
to the user within 30 calendar days of
• EACMS • Workflow or sign-off form
the termination action. For
showing password reset within
reassignments or transfers, change
30 calendar days of the
passwords for shared account(s) known
termination;
to the user within 30 calendar days
• Workflow or sign-off form
following the date that the Responsible
showing password reset within
Entity determines that the individual no
30 calendar days of the
longer requires retention of that
reassignments or transfers; or
access.
Documentation of the extenuating
If the Responsible Entity determines
operating circumstance and workflow
and documents that extenuating
or sign-off form showing password
operating circumstances require a
reset within 10 calendar days following
longer time period, change the
the end of the operating circumstance.
password(s) within 10 calendar days
following the end of the operating
circumstances.
Page 14 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
R6. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented access management program(s) to authorize, verify,
and revoke provisioned access to BCSI pertaining to the “Applicable Systems” identified in CIP-004-7 Table R6 – Access
Management for BES Cyber System Information that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
004-7 Table R6 – Access Management for BES Cyber System Information. To be considered access to BCSI in the context of
this requirement, an individual has both the ability to obtain and use BCSI. Provisioned access is to be considered the
result of the specific actions taken to provide an individual(s) the means to access BCSI (e.g., may include physical keys or
access cards, user accounts and associated rights and privileges, encryption keys). [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Same Day Operations and Operations Planning].
M6. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented programs that collectively include the applicable requirement
parts in CIP-004-7 Table R6 – Access Management for BES Cyber System Information and additional evidence to
demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-004-7 Table R6 – Access Management for BES Cyber System Information
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
6.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Prior to provisioning, authorize (unless Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: already authorized according to Part are not limited to, individual records or
4.1.) based on need, as determined by lists that include who is authorized, the
1. EACMS; and
the Responsible Entity, except for CIP date of the authorization, and the
2. PACS
Exceptional Circumstances: justification of business need for the
provisioned access.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
6.1.1. Provisioned electronic access to
with External Routable Connectivity
electronic BCSI; and
and their associated:
6.1.2. Provisioned physical access to
1. EACMS; and
physical BCSI.
2. PACS
Page 15 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
CIP-004-7 Table R6 – Access Management for BES Cyber System Information
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
6.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Verify at least once every 15 calendar Examples of evidence may include, but
their associated: months that all individuals with are not limited to, the documentation
provisioned access to BCSI: of the review that includes all of the
1. EACMS; and
following:
6.2.1. have an authorization record;
2. PACS
and • List of authorized individuals;
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
6.2.2. still need the provisioned access • List of individuals who have been
with External Routable Connectivity
to perform their current work provisioned access;
and their associated:
functions, as determined by the
• Verification that provisioned
1. EACMS; and
Responsible Entity.
access is appropriate based on
2. PACS
need; and
• Documented reconciliation
actions, if any.
6.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and For termination actions, remove the Examples of dated evidence may
their associated: individual’s ability to use provisioned include, but are not limited to, access
access to BCSI (unless already revoked revocation records associated with the
1. EACMS; and
according to Part 5.1) by the end of the terminations and dated within the next
2. PACS
next calendar day following the calendar day of the termination action.
effective date of the termination
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
action.
with External Routable Connectivity
and their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Page 16 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring and/or
enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in
their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention periods identify the period
of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is
shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide
other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last
audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of
time as part of an investigation:
• The applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard
for three calendar years.
• The applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the
time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
Page 17 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
2. Table of Compliance Elements
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning did not reinforce did not reinforce did not reinforce did not document or
cyber security cyber security cyber security implement any
practices during a practices during a practices during a security awareness
calendar quarter but calendar quarter but calendar quarter but process(es) to
did so less than 10 did so between 10 and did so within the reinforce cyber
calendar days after 30 calendar days after subsequent quarter security practices. (R1)
the start of a the start of a but beyond 30
OR
subsequent calendar subsequent calendar calendar days after
The Responsible Entity
quarter. (1.1) quarter. (1.1) the start of that
did not reinforce
calendar quarter. (1.1)
cyber security
practices and
associated physical
security practices for
at least two
consecutive calendar
quarters. (1.1)
R2 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning implemented a cyber implemented a cyber implemented a cyber did not implement a
security training security training security training cyber security training
program but failed to program but failed to program but failed to program appropriate
include one of the include two of the include three of the to individual roles,
training content topics training content topics training content topics functions, or
in Requirement Parts in Requirement Parts in Requirement Parts responsibilities. (R2)
Page 18 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
2.1.1 through 2.1.9. 2.1.1 through 2.1.9. 2.1.1 through 2.1.9.
OR
(2.1) (2.1) (2.1)
The Responsible Entity
OR OR OR
implemented a cyber
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity security training
implemented a cyber implemented a cyber implemented a cyber program but failed to
security training security training security training include four or more
program but failed to program but failed to program but failed to of the training content
train one individual train two individuals train three individuals topics in Requirement
(with the exception of (with the exception of (with the exception of Parts 2.1.1 through
CIP Exceptional CIP Exceptional CIP Exceptional 2.1.9. (2.1)
Circumstances) prior Circumstances) prior Circumstances) prior
OR
to their being granted to their being granted to their being granted
The Responsible Entity
authorized electronic authorized electronic authorized electronic
implemented a cyber
and authorized and authorized and authorized
security training
unescorted physical unescorted physical unescorted physical
program but failed to
access. (2.2) access. (2.2) access. (2.2)
train four or more
OR OR OR
individuals (with the
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity exception of CIP
implemented a cyber implemented a cyber implemented a cyber Exceptional
security training security training security training Circumstances) prior
program but failed to program but failed to program but failed to to their being granted
train one individual train two individuals train three individuals authorized electronic
with authorized with authorized with authorized and authorized
electronic or electronic or electronic or unescorted physical
authorized unescorted authorized unescorted authorized unescorted access. (2.2)
physical access within physical access within physical access within
OR
Page 19 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
15 calendar months of 15 calendar months of 15 calendar months of
The Responsible Entity
the previous training the previous training the previous training
implemented a cyber
completion date. (2.3) completion date. (2.3) completion date. (2.3)
security training
program but failed to
train four or more
individuals with
authorized electronic
or authorized
unescorted physical
access within 15
calendar months of
the previous training
completion date. (2.3)
R3 Operations Medium The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has a program for has a program for has a program for did not have all of the
conducting Personnel conducting Personnel conducting Personnel required elements as
Risk Assessments Risk Assessments Risk Assessments described by 3.1
(PRAs) for individuals, (PRAs) for individuals, (PRAs) for individuals, through 3.4 included
including contractors including contractors including contractors within documented
and service vendors, and service vendors, and service vendors, program(s) for
but did not conduct but did not conduct but did not conduct implementing
the PRA as a condition the PRA as a condition the PRA as a condition Personnel Risk
of granting authorized of granting authorized of granting authorized Assessments (PRAs),
electronic or electronic or electronic or for individuals,
authorized unescorted authorized unescorted authorized unescorted including contractors
physical access for physical access for physical access for and service vendors,
one individual. (R3) two individuals. (R3) three individuals. (R3) for obtaining and
Page 20 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
retaining authorized
OR OR OR
cyber or authorized
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
unescorted physical
did conduct Personnel did conduct Personnel did conduct Personnel
access. (R3)
Risk Assessments Risk Assessments Risk Assessments
OR
(PRAs) for individuals, (PRAs) for individuals, (PRAs) for individuals,
including contractors including contractors including contractors The Responsible Entity
and service vendors, and service vendors, and service vendors, has a program for
with authorized with authorized with authorized conducting Personnel
electronic or electronic or electronic or Risk Assessments
authorized unescorted authorized unescorted authorized unescorted (PRAs) for individuals,
physical access but did physical access but did physical access but did including contractors
not confirm identity not confirm identity not confirm identity and service vendors,
for one individual. (3.1 for two individuals. for three individuals. but did not conduct
& 3.4) (3.1 & 3.4) (3.1 & 3.4) the PRA as a condition
of granting authorized
OR OR OR
electronic or
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
authorized unescorted
has a process to has a process to has a process to
physical access for
perform seven-year perform seven-year perform seven-year
four or more
criminal history record criminal history record criminal history record
individuals. (R3)
checks for individuals, checks for individuals, checks for individuals,
OR
including contractors including contractors including contractors
and service vendors, and service vendors, and service vendors, The Responsible Entity
with authorized with authorized with authorized did conduct Personnel
electronic or electronic or electronic or Risk Assessments
authorized unescorted authorized unescorted authorized unescorted (PRAs) for individuals,
physical access but did physical access but did physical access but did including contractors
Page 21 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
not include the not include the not include the and service vendors,
required checks required checks required checks with authorized
described in 3.2.1 and described in 3.2.1 and described in 3.2.1 and electronic or
3.2.2 for one 3.2.2 for two 3.2.2 for three authorized unescorted
individual. (3.2 & 3.4) individuals. (3.2 & 3.4) individuals. (3.2 & 3.4) physical access but did
not confirm identity
OR OR OR
for four or more
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
individuals. (3.1 & 3.4)
did conduct Personnel did conduct Personnel did conduct Personnel
OR
Risk Assessments Risk Assessments Risk Assessments
(PRAs) for individuals, (PRAs) for individuals, (PRAs) for individuals, The Responsible Entity
including contractors including contractors including contractors has a process to
and service vendors, and service vendors, and service vendors, perform seven-year
with authorized with authorized with authorized criminal history record
electronic or electronic or electronic or checks for individuals,
authorized unescorted authorized unescorted authorized unescorted including contractors
physical access but did physical access but did physical access but did and service vendors,
not evaluate criminal not evaluate criminal not evaluate criminal with authorized
history records check history records check history records check electronic or
for access for access for access authorized unescorted
authorization for one authorization for two authorization for physical access but did
individual. (3.3 & 3.4) individuals. (3.3 & 3.4) three individuals. (3.3 not include the
& 3.4) required checks
OR OR
described in 3.2.1 and
OR
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
3.2.2 for four or more
did not conduct did not conduct The Responsible Entity
individuals. (3.2 & 3.4)
Personnel Risk Personnel Risk did not conduct
OR
Assessments (PRAs) Assessments (PRAs) Personnel Risk
Page 22 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
for one individual with for two individuals Assessments (PRAs)
The Responsible Entity
authorized electronic with authorized for three individuals
did conduct Personnel
or authorized electronic or with authorized
Risk Assessments
unescorted physical authorized unescorted electronic or
(PRAs) for individuals,
access within 7 physical access within authorized unescorted
including contractors
calendar years of the 7 calendar years of physical access within
and service vendors,
previous PRA the previous PRA 7 calendar years of
with authorized
completion date. (3.5) completion date. (3.5) the previous PRA
electronic or
completion date. (3.5)
authorized unescorted
physical access but did
not evaluate criminal
history records check
for access
authorization for four
or more individuals.
(3.3 & 3.4)
OR
The Responsible Entity
did not conduct
Personnel Risk
Assessments (PRAs)
for four or more
individuals with
authorized electronic
or authorized
unescorted physical
access within 7
Page 23 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
calendar years of the
previous PRA
completion date. (3.5)
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
R4 Operations Medium
did not verify that did not verify that did not verify that did not implement any
Planning and
individuals with active individuals with active individuals with active documented
Same Day
electronic or active electronic or active electronic or active program(s) for access
Operations
unescorted physical unescorted physical unescorted physical management. (R4)
access have access have access have
OR
authorization records authorization records authorization records
The Responsible Entity
during a calendar during a calendar during a calendar
did not implement
quarter but did so less quarter but did so quarter but did so
one or more
than 10 calendar days between 10 and 20 between 20 and 30
documented
after the start of a calendar days after calendar days after
program(s) for access
subsequent calendar the start of a the start of a
management that
quarter. (4.2) subsequent calendar subsequent calendar
includes a process to
quarter. (4.2) quarter. (4.2)
OR
authorize electronic
OR OR
The Responsible Entity access or unescorted
has implemented The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity physical access. (4.1)
processes to verify has implemented has implemented
OR
that user accounts, processes to verify processes to verify
The Responsible Entity
user account groups, that user accounts, that user accounts,
did not verify that
or user role user account groups, user account groups,
individuals with active
categories, and their or user role or user role
electronic or active
specific, associated categories, and their categories, and their
unescorted physical
privileges are correct specific, associated specific, associated
access have
and necessary within privileges are correct privileges are correct
Page 24 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
15 calendar months of and necessary within and necessary within authorization records
the previous 15 calendar months of 15 calendar months of for at least two
verification but for 5% the previous the previous consecutive calendar
or less of its BES Cyber verification but for verification but for quarters. (4.2)
Systems, privileges more than 5% but less more than 10% but
OR
were incorrect or than (or equal to) 10% less than (or equal to)
The Responsible Entity
unnecessary. (4.3) of its BES Cyber 15% of its BES Cyber
has implemented
Systems, privileges Systems, privileges
processes to verify
were incorrect or were incorrect or
that user accounts,
unnecessary. (4.3) unnecessary. (4.3)
user account groups,
or user role
categories, and their
specific, associated
privileges are correct
and necessary within
15 calendar months of
the previous
verification but for
more than 15% of its
BES Cyber Systems,
privileges were
incorrect or
unnecessary. (4.3)
R5 Same Day Medium The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Operations has implemented one has implemented one has implemented one has not implemented
or more process(es) to or more process(es) to or more process(es) to any documented
revoke the individual’s remove the ability for remove the ability for program(s) for access
Page 25 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
user accounts upon unescorted physical unescorted physical revocation for
and Operations
termination action but access and Interactive access and Interactive electronic access or
Planning
did not do so for Remote Access upon a Remote Access upon a unescorted physical
within 30 calendar termination action or termination action or access. (R5)
days of the date of complete the removal complete the removal
OR
termination action for within 24 hours of the within 24 hours of the
The Responsible Entity
one or more termination action but termination action but
has implemented one
individuals. (5.3) did not initiate those did not initiate those
or more process(es) to
removals for one removals for two
OR
remove the ability for
individual. (5.1) individuals. (5.1)
The Responsible Entity unescorted physical
OR OR
has implemented one access and Interactive
or more process(es) to The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity Remote Access upon a
change passwords for has implemented one has implemented one termination action or
shared accounts or more process(es) to or more process(es) to complete the removal
known to the user determine that an determine that an within 24 hours of the
upon termination individual no longer individual no longer termination action but
action, reassignment, requires retention of requires retention of did not initiate those
or transfer, but did access following access following removals for three or
not do so for within reassignments or reassignments or more individuals. (5.1)
30 calendar days of transfers but, for one transfers but, for two
OR
the date of individual, did not individuals, did not
The Responsible Entity
termination action, revoke the authorized revoke the authorized
has implemented one
reassignment, or electronic access to electronic access to
or more process(es) to
transfer for one or individual accounts individual accounts
determine that an
more individuals. (5.4) and authorized and authorized
individual no longer
unescorted physical unescorted physical
OR
requires retention of
access by the end of access by the end of
Page 26 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity the next calendar day the next calendar day access following
has implemented one following the following the reassignments or
or more process(es) to predetermined date. predetermined date. transfers but, for
determine and (5.2) (5.2) three or more
document extenuating individuals, did not
operating revoke the authorized
circumstances electronic access to
following a individual accounts
termination action, and authorized
reassignment, or unescorted physical
transfer, but did not access by the end of
change one or more the next calendar day
passwords for shared following the
accounts known to predetermined date.
the user within 10 (5.2)
calendar days
following the end of
the extenuating
operating
circumstances. (5.4)
R6 Same Day Medium The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Operations and has implemented one has implemented one has implemented one did not implement
Operations or more program(s) as or more program(s) as or more program(s) as one or more
Planning required by required by required by documented access
Requirement R6 Part Requirement R6 Part Requirement R6 Part management
6.1 but, for one 6.1 but, for two 6.1 but, for three program(s) for BCSI.
individual, did not individuals, did not individuals, did not (R6)
Page 27 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
authorize provisioned authorize provisioned authorize provisioned
OR
electronic access to electronic access to electronic access to
The Responsible Entity
electronic BCSI or electronic BCSI or electronic BCSI or
has implemented one
provisioned physical provisioned physical provisioned physical
or more program(s) as
access to physical access to physical access to physical
required by
BCSI. (6.1) BCSI. (6.1) BCSI. (6.1)
Requirement R6 Part
OR OR OR
6.1 but, for four or
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity more individuals, did
performed the performed the performed the not authorize
verification required verification required verification required provisioned electronic
by Requirement R6 by Requirement R6 by Requirement R6 access to electronic
Part 6.2 more than 15 Part 6.2 more than 16 Part 6.2 more than 17 BCSI or provisioned
calendar months but calendar months but calendar months but physical access to
less than or equal to less than or equal to less than or equal to physical BCSI. (6.1)
16 calendar months of 17 calendar months of 18 calendar months of
OR
the previous the previous the previous
The Responsible Entity
verification. (6.2) verification. (6.2) verification. (6.2)
performed the
OR OR OR
verification required
The Responsible Entity
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity by Requirement R6
has implemented one
has implemented one has implemented one Part 6.2 more than 18
or more program(s) to
or more program(s) to or more program(s) to calendar months of
remove the
remove the remove the the previous
individual’s ability to individual’s ability to individual’s ability to verification. (6.2)
use provisioned use provisioned use provisioned
OR
access to BCSI but, for access to BCSI but, for access to BCSI but, for
one individual, did not two individuals, did
three individuals, did
Page 28 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-004-7)
Time Horizon VRF
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
do so by the not do so by the not do so by the
The Responsible Entity
timeframe required in timeframe required in timeframe required in
has implemented one
Requirement R6, Part Requirement R6, Part
Requirement R6, Part
or more program(s) to
6.3. 6.3.
6.3.
remove the
individual’s ability to
use provisioned
access to BCSI but, for
four or more
individuals, did not do
so by the timeframe
required in
Requirement R6, Part
6.3.
Page 29 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
“control center.”
Modifications to clarify the requirements
and to bring the compliance elements
into conformance with the latest
guidelines for developing compliance
elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business
2 9/30/09
judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the
3 12/16/09 sentence pertaining to removing
component or system from service in
order to perform testing, in response to
FERC order issued September 30, 2009.
Approved by the NERC Board of
3 12/16/09
Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
Approved by the NERC Board of
4 1/24/11
Trustees.
Page 30 of 31
CIP-004-7 — Cyber Security – Personnel & Training
Version Date Action Change Tracking
Modified to coordinate
with other CIP
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. standards and to revise
format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-004-5.
5.1 9/30/13 Modified two VSLs in R4 Errata
Addressed two FERC
directives from Order No.
791 related to identify,
6 11/13/14
Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. assess, and correct
language and
communication
networks.
Replaces the version
adopted by the Board on
11/13/2014. Revised
version addresses
6 2/12/15
Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. remaining directives
from Order No. 791
related to transient
devices and low impact
BES Cyber Systems.
FERC order issued approving CIP-004-6.
6 1/21/16
Docket No. RM15-14-000
Revised to enhance BES
7 8/12/21
Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees reliability for entities to
manage their BCSI.
FERC Order issued approving CIP-004-7
7 12/7/21
Docket No. RD21-6-000
Page 31 of 31
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-004-7.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-002-5.1a.pdf ---
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
2. Number: CIP-002-5.1a
3. Purpose: To identify and categorize BES Cyber Systems and their associated BES
Cyber Assets for the application of cyber security requirements commensurate with
the adverse impact that loss, compromise, or misuse of those BES Cyber Systems
could have on the reliable operation of the BES. Identification and categorization of
BES Cyber Systems support appropriate protection against compromises that could
lead to misoperation or instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional entity
or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities, systems,
and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage load shedding
(UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2. Each Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme where the
Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
Page 1 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.1.5. Interchange Coordinator or Interchange Authority
4.1.6. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.7. Transmission Operator
4.1.8. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above
are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or restoration
of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme where the
Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-002-5.1a:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security Perimeters.
Page 2 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R.
Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not included
in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates:
1. 24 Months Minimum – CIP-002-5.1a shall become effective on the later of July
1, 2015, or the first calendar day of the ninth calendar quarter after the effective
date of the order providing applicable regulatory approval.
2. In those jurisdictions where no regulatory approval is required CIP-002-5.1a shall
become effective on the first day of the ninth calendar quarter following Board
of Trustees’ approval, or as otherwise made effective pursuant to the laws
applicable to such ERO governmental authorities.
6. Background:
This standard provides “bright-line” criteria for applicable Responsible Entities to
categorize their BES Cyber Systems based on the impact of their associated Facilities,
systems, and equipment, which, if destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise
rendered unavailable, would affect the reliable operation of the Bulk Electric System.
Several concepts provide the basis for the approach to the standard.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered items are items
that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section and the criteria in Attachment 1 of CIP-
002 use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and UVLS. This particular threshold of 300
MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version 1 of the CIP Cyber Security
Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is specifically addressing UVLS
and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk Electric System. A review of
UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability standards for UFLS program
requirements to date indicates that the historical value of 300 MW represents an
adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS operational tolerances.
BES Cyber Systems
One of the fundamental differences between Versions 4 and 5 of the CIP Cyber
Security Standards is the shift from identifying Critical Cyber Assets to identifying BES
Cyber Systems. This change results from the drafting team’s review of the NIST Risk
Management Framework and the use of an analogous term “information system” as
the target for categorizing and applying security controls.
Page 3 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
Version 4 Cyber Assets Version 5 Cyber Assets
BES Cyber System
CCCCAA
CCCCAA
Associated
Protected Cyber
Assets
NNoonn--CCrriittiiccaall CCyybbeerr AAsssseett
WWiitthhiinn aann EESSPP
Associated
Electronic and
Physical Access
Control and
Monitoring
Systems
CIP-005-4 R1.5 and
CIP-006-4 R2
In transitioning from Version 4 to Version 5, a BES Cyber System can be viewed simply
as a grouping of Critical Cyber Assets (as that term is used in Version 4). The CIP Cyber
Security Standards use the “BES Cyber System” term primarily to provide a higher level
for referencing the object of a requirement. For example, it becomes possible to
apply requirements dealing with recovery and malware protection to a grouping
rather than individual Cyber Assets, and it becomes clearer in the requirement that
malware protection applies to the system as a whole and may not be necessary for
every individual device to comply.
Another reason for using the term “BES Cyber System” is to provide a convenient level
at which a Responsible Entity can organize their documented implementation of the
requirements and compliance evidence. Responsible Entities can use the well-
developed concept of a security plan for each BES Cyber System to document the
programs, processes, and plans in place to comply with security requirements.
It is left up to the Responsible Entity to determine the level of granularity at which to
identify a BES Cyber System within the qualifications in the definition of BES Cyber
System. For example, the Responsible Entity might choose to view an entire plant
control system as a single BES Cyber System, or it might choose to view certain
components of the plant control system as distinct BES Cyber Systems. The
Responsible Entity should take into consideration the operational environment and
Page 4 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
scope of management when defining the BES Cyber System boundary in order to
maximize efficiency in secure operations. Defining the boundary too tightly may result
in redundant paperwork and authorizations, while defining the boundary too broadly
could make the secure operation of the BES Cyber System difficult to monitor and
assess.
Reliable Operation of the BES
The scope of the CIP Cyber Security Standards is restricted to BES Cyber Systems that
would impact the reliable operation of the BES. In order to identify BES Cyber
Systems, Responsible Entities determine whether the BES Cyber Systems perform or
support any BES reliability function according to those reliability tasks identified for
their reliability function and the corresponding functional entity’s responsibilities as
defined in its relationships with other functional entities in the NERC Functional
Model. This ensures that the initial scope for consideration includes only those BES
Cyber Systems and their associated BES Cyber Assets that perform or support the
reliable operation of the BES. The definition of BES Cyber Asset provides the basis for
this scoping.
Real-time Operations
One characteristic of the BES Cyber Asset is a real-time scoping characteristic. The
time horizon that is significant for BES Cyber Systems and BES Cyber Assets subject to
the application of these Version 5 CIP Cyber Security Standards is defined as that
which is material to real-time operations for the reliable operation of the BES. To
provide a better defined time horizon than “Real-time,” BES Cyber Assets are those
Cyber Assets that, if rendered unavailable, degraded, or misused, would adversely
impact the reliable operation of the BES within 15 minutes of the activation or
exercise of the compromise. This time window must not include in its consideration
the activation of redundant BES Cyber Assets or BES Cyber Systems: from the cyber
security standpoint, redundancy does not mitigate cyber security vulnerabilities.
Categorization Criteria
The criteria defined in Attachment 1 are used to categorize BES Cyber Systems into
impact categories. Requirement 1 only requires the discrete identification of BES
Cyber Systems for those in the high impact and medium impact categories. All BES
Cyber Systems for Facilities not included in Attachment 1 – Impact Rating Criteria,
Criteria 1.1 to 1.4 and Criteria 2.1 to 2.11 default to be low impact.
This general process of categorization of BES Cyber Systems based on impact on the
reliable operation of the BES is consistent with risk management approaches for the
purpose of application of cyber security requirements in the remainder of the Version
5 CIP Cyber Security Standards.
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems, Physical Access Control Systems,
and Protected Cyber Assets that are associated with BES Cyber Systems
Page 5 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
BES Cyber Systems have associated Cyber Assets, which, if compromised, pose a
threat to the BES Cyber System by virtue of: (a) their location within the Electronic
Security Perimeter (Protected Cyber Assets), or (b) the security control function they
perform (Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems and Physical Access Control
Systems). These Cyber Assets include:
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (“EACMS”) – Examples include:
Electronic Access Points, Intermediate Systems, authentication servers (e.g.,
RADIUS servers, Active Directory servers, Certificate Authorities), security event
monitoring systems, and intrusion detection systems.
Physical Access Control Systems (“PACS”)– Examples include: authentication
servers, card systems, and badge control systems.
Protected Cyber Assets (“PCA”) – Examples may include, to the extent they are
within the ESP: file servers, ftp servers, time servers, LAN switches, networked
printers, digital fault recorders, and emission monitoring systems.
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement a process that considers each of the
following assets for purposes of parts 1.1 through 1.3: [Violation Risk Factor:
High][Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
i.Control Centers and backup Control Centers;
ii.Transmission stations and substations;
iii.Generation resources;
iv.Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart
Resources and Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements;
v.Special Protection Systems that support the reliable operation of the Bulk
Electric System; and
vi.For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability
section 4.2.1 above.
1.1. Identify each of the high impact BES Cyber Systems according to
Attachment 1, Section 1, if any, at each asset;
1.2. Identify each of the medium impact BES Cyber Systems according to
Attachment 1, Section 2, if any, at each asset; and
1.3. Identify each asset that contains a low impact BES Cyber System
according to Attachment 1, Section 3, if any (a discrete list of low impact
BES Cyber Systems is not required).
M1. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, dated electronic or physical lists
required by Requirement R1, and Parts 1.1 and 1.2.
Page 6 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R2. The Responsible Entity shall: [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations
Planning]
2.1 Review the identifications in Requirement R1 and its parts (and update
them if there are changes identified) at least once every 15 calendar
months, even if it has no identified items in Requirement R1, and
2.2 Have its CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications
required by Requirement R1 at least once every 15 calendar months,
even if it has no identified items in Requirement R1.
M2. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, electronic or physical dated
records to demonstrate that the Responsible Entity has reviewed and updated, where
necessary, the identifications required in Requirement R1 and its parts, and has had its
CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications required in Requirement
R1 and its parts at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it has none identified
in Requirement R1 and its parts, as required by Requirement R2.
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
The Regional Entity shall serve as the Compliance Enforcement Authority (“CEA”)
unless the applicable entity is owned, operated, or controlled by the Regional
Entity. In such cases the ERO or a Regional Entity approved by FERC or other
applicable governmental authority shall serve as the CEA.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show
that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation:
 Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
 If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
Page 7 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
 The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
 Compliance Audit
 Self-Certification
 Spot Checking
 Compliance Investigation
 Self-Reporting
 Complaint
1.4. Additional Compliance Information
 None
Page 8 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
2. Table of Compliance Elements
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-5.1a)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Operations High
For Responsible For Responsible For Responsible For Responsible
Planning
Entities with more Entities with more Entities with more Entities with more
than a total of 40 BES than a total of 40 BES than a total of 40 BES than a total of 40 BES
assets in Requirement assets in Requirement assets in Requirement assets in Requirement
R1, five percent or R1, more than five R1, more than 10 R1, more than 15
fewer BES assets have percent but less than percent but less than percent of BES assets
not been considered or equal to 10 percent or equal to 15 percent have not been
according to of BES assets have not of BES assets have not considered, according
Requirement R1; been considered, been considered, to Requirement R1;
according to according to
OR OR
Requirement R1; Requirement R1;
For Responsible For Responsible
OR OR
Entities with a total of Entities with a total of
40 or fewer BES assets, For Responsible For Responsible 40 or fewer BES assets,
2 or fewer BES assets Entities with a total of Entities with a total of more than six BES
in Requirement R1, 40 or fewer BES assets, 40 or fewer BES assets, assets in Requirement
have not been more than two, but more than four, but R1, have not been
considered according fewer than or equal to fewer than or equal to considered according
to Requirement R1; four BES assets in six BES assets in to Requirement R1;
Requirement R1, have Requirement R1, have
OR OR
not been considered not been considered
For Responsible For Responsible
according to according to
Entities with more Entities with more
Requirement R1; Requirement R1;
than a total of 100 than a total of 100
OR OR
high and medium high and medium
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber
Page 9 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-5.1a)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Systems, five percent For Responsible For Responsible Systems, more than 15
or fewer of identified Entities with more Entities with more percent of identified
BES Cyber Systems than a total of 100 than a total of 100 BES Cyber Systems
have not been high and medium high or medium have not been
categorized or have impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber categorized or have
been incorrectly Systems, more than Systems, more than 10 been incorrectly
categorized at a lower five percent but less percent but less than categorized at a lower
category; than or equal to 10 or equal to 15 percent category;
percent of identified of identified BES Cyber
OR OR
BES Cyber Systems Systems have not been
For Responsible For Responsible
have not been categorized or have
Entities with a total of Entities with a total of
categorized or have been incorrectly
100 or fewer high and 100 or fewer high and
been incorrectly categorized at a lower
medium impact BES medium impact BES
categorized at a lower category;
Cyber Systems, five or Cyber Systems, more
category;
OR
fewer identified BES than 15 identified BES
OR
Cyber Systems have For Responsible Cyber Systems have
not been categorized For Responsible Entities with a total of not been categorized
or have been Entities with a total of 100 or fewer high or or have been
incorrectly categorized 100 or fewer high and medium impact and incorrectly categorized
at a lower category. medium impact and BES Cyber Assets, at a lower category.
BES Cyber Systems, more than 10 but less
OR OR
more than five but less than or equal to 15
For Responsible For Responsible
than or equal to 10 identified BES Cyber
Entities with more Entities with more
identified BES Cyber Assets have not been
than a total of 100 than a total of 100
Systems have not been categorized or have
high and medium high and medium
categorized or have been incorrectly
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber
been incorrectly
Page 10 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-5.1a)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Systems, five percent categorized at a lower categorized at a lower Systems, more than 15
or fewer high or category. category. percent of high or
medium BES Cyber medium impact BES
OR OR
Systems have not been Cyber Systems have
For Responsible For Responsible
identified; not been identified;
Entities with more Entities with more
OR OR
than a total of 100 than a total of 100
For Responsible high and medium high and medium For Responsible
Entities with a total of impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber Entities with a total of
100 or fewer high and Systems, more than Systems, more than 10 100 or fewer high and
medium impact BES five percent but less percent but less than medium impact BES
Cyber Systems, five or than or equal to 10 or equal to 15 percent Cyber Systems, more
fewer high or medium percent high or high or medium BES than 15 high or
BES Cyber Systems medium BES Cyber Cyber Systems have medium impact BES
have not been Systems have not been not been identified; Cyber Systems have
identified. identified; not been identified.
OR
OR
For Responsible
For Responsible Entities with a total of
Entities with a total of 100 or fewer high and
100 or fewer high and medium impact BES
medium impact BES Cyber Systems, more
Cyber Systems, more than 10 but less than
than five but less than or equal to 15 high or
or equal to 10 high or medium BES Cyber
medium BES Cyber Systems have not been
Systems have not been identified.
identified.
Page 11 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Time VRF Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-5.1a)
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R2 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning did not complete its did not complete its did not complete its did not complete its
review and update for review and update for review and update for review and update for
the identification the identification the identification the identification
required for R1 within required for R1 within required for R1 within required for R1 within
15 calendar months 16 calendar months 17 calendar months 18 calendar months of
but less than or equal but less than or equal but less than or equal the previous review.
to 16 calendar months to 17 calendar months to 18 calendar months (R2.1)
of the previous review. of the previous review. of the previous review.
OR
(R2.1) (R2.1) (R2.1)
The Responsible Entity
OR OR OR
failed to complete its
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity approval of the
did not complete its failed to complete its failed to complete its identifications
approval of the approval of the approval of the required by R1 by the
identifications identifications identifications CIP Senior Manager or
required by R1 by the required by R1 by the required by R1 by the delegate according to
CIP Senior Manager or CIP Senior Manager or CIP Senior Manager or Requirement R2 within
delegate according to delegate according to delegate according to 18 calendar months of
Requirement R2 within Requirement R2 within Requirement R2 within the previous approval.
15 calendar months 16 calendar months 17 calendar months (R2.2)
but less than or equal but less than or equal but less than or equal
to 16 calendar months to 17 calendar months to 18 calendar months
of the previous of the previous of the previous
approval. (R2.2) approval. (R2.2) approval. (R2.2)
Page 12 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
Page 13 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
CIP-002-5.1a - Attachment 1
Impact Rating Criteria
The criteria defined in Attachment 1 do not constitute stand-alone compliance requirements,
but are criteria characterizing the level of impact and are referenced by requirements.
1. High Impact Rating (H)
Each BES Cyber System used by and located at any of the following:
1.1. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Reliability Coordinator.
1.2. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Balancing Authority: 1) for generation equal to or greater than an
aggregate of 3000 MW in a single Interconnection, or 2) for one or more of the assets
that meet criterion 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
1.3. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Transmission Operator for one or more of the assets that meet
criterion 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, or 2.10.
1.4 Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Generator Operator for one or more of the assets that meet
criterion 2.1, 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
2. Medium Impact Rating (M)
Each BES Cyber System, not included in Section 1 above, associated with any of the following:
2.1. Commissioned generation, by each group of generating units at a single plant location,
with an aggregate highest rated net Real Power capability of the preceding 12
calendar months equal to or exceeding 1500 MW in a single Interconnection. For each
group of generating units, the only BES Cyber Systems that meet this criterion are
those shared BES Cyber Systems that could, within 15 minutes, adversely impact the
reliable operation of any combination of units that in aggregate equal or exceed 1500
MW in a single Interconnection.
2.2. Each BES reactive resource or group of resources at a single location (excluding
generation Facilities) with an aggregate maximum Reactive Power nameplate rating of
1000 MVAR or greater (excluding those at generation Facilities). The only BES Cyber
Systems that meet this criterion are those shared BES Cyber Systems that could,
within 15 minutes, adversely impact the reliable operation of any combination of
resources that in aggregate equal or exceed 1000 MVAR.
Page 14 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
2.3. Each generation Facility that its Planning Coordinator or Transmission Planner
designates, and informs the Generator Owner or Generator Operator, as necessary to
avoid an Adverse Reliability Impact in the planning horizon of more than one year.
2.4. Transmission Facilities operated at 500 kV or higher. For the purpose of this criterion,
the collector bus for a generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is
part of the generation interconnection Facility.
2.5. Transmission Facilities that are operating between 200 kV and 499 kV at a single
station or substation, where the station or substation is connected at 200 kV or higher
voltages to three or more other Transmission stations or substations and has an
"aggregate weighted value" exceeding 3000 according to the table below. The
"aggregate weighted value" for a single station or substation is determined by
summing the "weight value per line" shown in the table below for each incoming and
each outgoing BES Transmission Line that is connected to another Transmission
station or substation. For the purpose of this criterion, the collector bus for a
generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is part of the generation
interconnection Facility.
Voltage Value of a Line Weight Value per Line
less than 200 kV (not applicable) (not applicable)
200 kV to 299 kV 700
300 kV to 499 kV 1300
500 kV and above 0
2.6. Generation at a single plant location or Transmission Facilities at a single station or
substation location that are identified by its Reliability Coordinator, Planning
Coordinator, or Transmission Planner as critical to the derivation of Interconnection
Reliability Operating Limits (IROLs) and their associated contingencies.
2.7. Transmission Facilities identified as essential to meeting Nuclear Plant Interface
Requirements.
2.8. Transmission Facilities, including generation interconnection Facilities, providing the
generation interconnection required to connect generator output to the Transmission
Systems that, if destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable,
would result in the loss of the generation Facilities identified by any Generator Owner
as a result of its application of Attachment 1, criterion 2.1 or 2.3.
2.9. Each Special Protection System (SPS), Remedial Action Scheme (RAS), or automated
switching System that operates BES Elements, that, if destroyed, degraded, misused or
otherwise rendered unavailable, would cause one or more Interconnection Reliability
Operating Limits (IROLs) violations for failure to operate as designed or cause a
reduction in one or more IROLs if destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise
rendered unavailable.
Page 15 of 37
CIP-002-5.1a — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
2.10. Each system or group of Elements that performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system, without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more
implementing undervoltage load shedding (UVLS) or underfrequency load shedding
(UFLS) under a load shedding program that is subject to one or more requirements in
a NERC or regional reliability standard.
2.11. Each Control Center or backup Control Center, not already included in High Impact
Rating (H) above, used to perform the functional obligations of the Generator
Operator for an aggregate highest rated net Real Power capability of the preceding 12
calendar months equal to or exceeding 1500 MW in a single Interconnection.
2.12. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Transmission Operator not included in High Impact Rating (H),
above.
2.13. Each Control Center or backup Control Center, not already included in High Impact
Rating (H) above, used to perform the functional obligations of the Balancing
Authority for generation equal to or greater than an aggregate of 1500 MW in a single
Interconnection.
3. Low Impact Rating (L)
BES Cyber Systems not included in Sections 1 or 2 above that are associated with any of the
following assets and that meet the applicability qualifications in Section 4 - Applicability, part
4.2 – Facilities, of this standard:
3.1. Control Centers and backup Control Centers.
3.2. Transmission stations and substations.
3.3. Generation resources.
3.4. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart Resources and
Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements.
3.5. Special Protection Systems that support the reliable operation of the Bulk Electric
System.
3.6. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability section 4.2.1
above.
Page 16 of 37
Appendix 1
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Section 4 – Scope of Applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Standards
Section “4. Applicability” of the standards provides important information for Responsible
Entities to determine the scope of the applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Requirements.
Section “4.1. Functional Entities” is a list of NERC functional entities to which the standard
applies. If the entity is registered as one or more of the functional entities listed in section 4.1,
then the NERC CIP Cyber Security Standards apply. Note that there is a qualification in section
4.1 that restricts the applicability in the case of Distribution Providers to only those that own
certain types of systems and equipment listed in 4.2.
Section “4.2. Facilities” defines the scope of the Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by
the Responsible Entity, as qualified in section 4.1, that is subject to the requirements of the
standard. In addition to the set of BES Facilities, Control Centers, and other systems and
equipment, the list includes the qualified set of systems and equipment owned by Distribution
Providers. While the NERC Glossary term “Facilities” already includes the BES characteristic, the
additional use of the term BES here is meant to reinforce the scope of applicability of these
Facilities where it is used, especially in this applicability scoping section. This in effect sets the
scope of Facilities, systems, and equipment that is subject to the standards. This section is
especially significant in CIP-002-5.1a and represents the total scope of Facilities, systems, and
equipment to which the criteria in Attachment 1 apply. This is important because it determines
the balance of these Facilities, systems, and equipment that are Low Impact once those that
qualify under the High and Medium Impact categories are filtered out.
For the purpose of identifying groups of Facilities, systems, and equipment, whether by location
or otherwise, the Responsible Entity identifies assets as described in Requirement R1 of CIP-
002-5.1a. This is a process familiar to Responsible Entities that have to comply with versions 1,
2, 3, and 4 of the CIP standards for Critical Assets. As in versions 1, 2, 3, and 4, Responsible
Entities may use substations, generation plants, and Control Centers at single site locations as
identifiers of these groups of Facilities, systems, and equipment.
CIP-002-5.1a
CIP-002-5.1a requires that applicable Responsible Entities categorize their BES Cyber Systems
and associated BES Cyber Assets according to the criteria in Attachment 1. A BES Cyber Asset
includes in its definition, “…that if rendered unavailable, degraded, or misused would, within 15
minutes adversely impact the reliable operation of the BES.”
The following provides guidance that a Responsible Entity may use to identify the BES Cyber
Systems that would be in scope. The concept of BES reliability operating service is useful in
providing Responsible Entities with the option of a defined process for scoping those BES Cyber
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Systems that would be subject to CIP-002-5.1a. The concept includes a number of named BES
reliability operating services. These named services include:
Dynamic Response to BES conditions
Balancing Load and Generation
Controlling Frequency (Real Power)
Controlling Voltage (Reactive Power)
Managing Constraints
Monitoring & Control
Restoration of BES
Situational Awareness
Inter-Entity Real-Time Coordination and Communication
Responsibility for the reliable operation of the BES is spread across all Entity Registrations. Each
entity registration has its own special contribution to reliable operations and the following
discussion helps identify which entity registration, in the context of those functional entities to
which these CIP standards apply, performs which reliability operating service, as a process to
identify BES Cyber Systems that would be in scope. The following provides guidance for
Responsible Entities to determine applicable reliability operations services according to their
Function Registration type.
Entity Registration RC BA TOP TO DP GOP GO
Dynamic Response X X X X X X
Balancing Load & X X X X X X X
Generation
Controlling Frequency X X X
Controlling Voltage X X X X
Managing Constraints X X X
Monitoring and Control X X
Restoration X X
Situation Awareness X X X X
Inter-Entity coordination X X X X X X
Dynamic Response
The Dynamic Response Operating Service includes those actions performed by BES Elements or
subsystems which are automatically triggered to initiate a response to a BES condition. These
actions are triggered by a single element or control device or a combination of these elements
or devices in concert to perform an action or cause a condition in reaction to the triggering
action or condition. The types of dynamic responses that may be considered as potentially
having an impact on the BES are:
Page 18 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
 Spinning reserves (contingency reserves)
 Providing actual reserve generation when called upon (GO,GOP)
 Monitoring that reserves are sufficient (BA)
 Governor Response
 Control system used to actuate governor response (GO)
 Protection Systems (transmission & generation)
 Lines, buses, transformers, generators (DP, TO, TOP, GO, GOP)
 Zone protection for breaker failure (DP, TO, TOP)
 Breaker protection (DP, TO, TOP)
 Current, frequency, speed, phase (TO,TOP, GO,GOP)
 Special Protection Systems or Remedial Action Schemes
 Sensors, relays, and breakers, possibly software (DP, TO, TOP)
 Under and Over Frequency relay protection (includes automatic load shedding)
 Sensors, relays & breakers (DP)
 Under and Over Voltage relay protection (includes automatic load shedding)
 Sensors, relays & breakers (DP)
 Power System Stabilizers (GO)
Balancing Load and Generation
The Balancing Load and Generation Operations Service includes activities, actions and
conditions necessary for monitoring and controlling generation and load in the operations
planning horizon and in real-time. Aspects of the Balancing Load and Generation function
include, but are not limited to:
 Calculation of Area Control Error (ACE)
 Field data sources (real time tie flows, frequency sources, time error, etc) (TO, TOP)
 Software used to perform calculation (BA)
 Demand Response
 Ability to identify load change need (BA)
 Ability to implement load changes (TOP,DP)
 Manually Initiated Load shedding
 Ability to identify load change need (BA)
 Ability to implement load changes (TOP, DP)
Page 19 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
 Non-spinning reserve (contingency reserve)
 Know generation status, capability, ramp rate, start time (GO, BA)
 Start units and provide energy (GOP)
Controlling Frequency (Real Power)
The Controlling Frequency Operations Service includes activities, actions and conditions which
ensure, in real time, that frequency remains within bounds acceptable for the reliability or
operability of the BES. Aspects of the Controlling Frequency function include, but are limited
to:
 Generation Control (such as AGC)
 ACE, current generator output, ramp rate, unit characteristics (BA, GOP, GO)
 Software to calculate unit adjustments (BA)
 Transmit adjustments to individual units (GOP)
 Unit controls implementing adjustments (GOP)
 Regulation (regulating reserves)
 Frequency source, schedule (BA)
 Governor control system (GO)
Controlling Voltage (Reactive Power)
The Controlling Voltage Operations Service includes activities, actions and conditions which
ensure, in real time, that voltage remains within bounds acceptable for the reliability or
operability of the BES. Aspects of the Controlling Voltage function include, but are not limited
to:
 Automatic Voltage Regulation (AVR)
 Sensors, stator control system, feedback (GO)
 Capacitive resources
 Status, control (manual or auto), feedback (TOP, TO,DP)
 Inductive resources (transformer tap changer, or inductors)
 Status, control (manual or auto), feedback (TOP,TO,DP)
 Static VAR Compensators (SVC)
 Status, computations, control (manual or auto), feedback (TOP, TO,DP)
Page 20 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Managing Constraints
Managing Constraints includes activities, actions and conditions that are necessary to ensure
that elements of the BES operate within design limits and constraints established for the
reliability and operability of the BES. Aspects of the Managing Constraints include, but are not
limited to:
 Available Transfer Capability (ATC) (TOP)
 Interchange schedules (TOP, RC)
 Generation re-dispatch and unit commit (GOP)
 Identify and monitor SOL’s & IROL’s (TOP, RC)
 Identify and monitor Flow gates (TOP, RC)
Monitoring and Control
Monitoring and Control includes those activities, actions and conditions that provide
monitoring and control of BES Elements. An example aspect of the Control and Operation
function is:
 All methods of operating breakers and switches
 SCADA (TOP, GOP)
 Substation automation (TOP)
Restoration of BES
The Restoration of BES Operations Service includes activities, actions and conditions necessary
to go from a shutdown condition to an operating condition delivering electric power without
external assistance. Aspects of the Restoration of BES function include, but are not limited to:
 Restoration including planned cranking path
 Through black start units (TOP, GOP)
 Through tie lines (TOP, GOP)
 Off-site power for nuclear facilities. (TOP, TO, BA, RC, DP, GO, GOP)
 Coordination (TOP, TO, BA, RC, DP, GO, GOP)
Situational Awareness
The Situational Awareness function includes activities, actions and conditions established by
policy, directive or standard operating procedure necessary to assess the current condition of
the BES and anticipate effects of planned and unplanned changes to conditions. Aspects of the
Situation Awareness function include:
Page 21 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
 Monitoring and alerting (such as EMS alarms) (TOP, GOP, RC,BA)
 Change management (TOP,GOP,RC,BA)
 Current Day and Next Day planning (TOP)
 Contingency Analysis (RC)
 Frequency monitoring (BA, RC)
Inter-Entity Coordination
The Inter-Entity coordination and communication function includes activities, actions, and
conditions established by policy, directive, or standard operating procedure necessary for the
coordination and communication between Responsible Entities to ensure the reliability and
operability of the BES. Aspects of the Inter-Entity Coordination and Communication function
include:
 Scheduled interchange (BA,TOP,GOP,RC)
 Facility operational data and status (TO, TOP, GO, GOP, RC, BA)
 Operational directives (TOP, RC, BA)
Applicability to Distribution Providers
It is expected that only Distribution Providers that own or operate facilities that qualify in the
Applicability section will be subject to these Version 5 Cyber Security Standards. Distribution
Providers that do not own or operate any facility that qualifies are not subject to these
standards. The qualifications are based on the requirements for registration as a Distribution
Provider and on the requirements applicable to Distribution Providers in NERC Standard EOP-
005.
Requirement R1:
Requirement R1 implements the methodology for the categorization of BES Cyber Systems
according to their impact on the BES. Using the traditional risk assessment equation, it reduces
the measure of the risk to an impact (consequence) assessment, assuming the vulnerability
index of 1 (the Systems are assumed to be vulnerable) and a probability of threat of 1 (100
percent). The criteria in Attachment 1 provide a measure of the impact of the BES assets
supported by these BES Cyber Systems.
Responsible Entities are required to identify and categorize those BES Cyber Systems that have
high and medium impact. BES Cyber Systems for BES assets not specified in Attachment 1,
Criteria 1.1 – 1.4 and Criteria 2.1 – 2.11 default to low impact.
Page 22 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Attachment 1
Overall Application
In the application of the criteria in Attachment 1, Responsible Entities should note that the
approach used is based on the impact of the BES Cyber System as measured by the bright-line
criteria defined in Attachment 1.
 When the drafting team uses the term “Facilities”, there is some latitude to Responsible
Entities to determine included Facilities. The term Facility is defined in the NERC Glossary of
Terms as “A set of electrical equipment that operates as a single Bulk Electric System
Element (e.g., a line, a generator, a shunt compensator, transformer, etc.).” In most cases,
the criteria refer to a group of Facilities in a given location that supports the reliable
operation of the BES. For example, for Transmission assets, the substation may be
designated as the group of Facilities. However, in a substation that includes equipment that
supports BES operations along with equipment that only supports Distribution operations,
the Responsible Entity may be better served to consider only the group of Facilities that
supports BES operation. In that case, the Responsible Entity may designate the group of
Facilities by location, with qualifications on the group of Facilities that supports reliable
operation of the BES, as the Facilities that are subject to the criteria for categorization of
BES Cyber Systems. Generation Facilities are separately discussed in the Generation section
below. In CIP-002-5.1a, these groups of Facilities, systems, and equipment are sometimes
designated as BES assets. For example, an identified BES asset may be a named substation,
generating plant, or Control Center. Responsible Entities have flexibility in how they group
Facilities, systems, and equipment at a location.
 In certain cases, a BES Cyber System may be categorized by meeting multiple criteria. In
such cases, the Responsible Entity may choose to document all criteria that result in the
categorization. This will avoid inadvertent miscategorization when it no longer meets one
of the criteria, but still meets another.
 It is recommended that each BES Cyber System should be listed by only one Responsible
Entity. Where there is joint ownership, it is advisable that the owning Responsible Entities
should formally agree on the designated Responsible Entity responsible for compliance with
the standards.
High Impact Rating (H)
This category includes those BES Cyber Systems, used by and at Control Centers (and the
associated data centers included in the definition of Control Centers), that perform the
functional obligations of the Reliability Coordinator (RC), Balancing Authority (BA), Transmission
Operator (TOP), or Generator Operator (GOP), as defined under the Tasks heading of the
applicable Function and the Relationship with Other Entities heading of the functional entity in
the NERC Functional Model, and as scoped by the qualification in Attachment 1, Criteria 1.1,
1.2, 1.3 and 1.4. While those entities that have been registered as the above-named functional
entities are specifically referenced, it must be noted that there may be agreements where some
Page 23 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
of the functional obligations of a Transmission Operator may be delegated to a Transmission
Owner (TO). In these cases, BES Cyber Systems at these TO Control Centers that perform these
functional obligations would be subject to categorization as high impact. The criteria notably
specifically emphasize functional obligations, not necessarily the RC, BA, TOP, or GOP facilities.
One must note that the definition of Control Center specifically refers to reliability tasks for RCs,
Bas, TOPs, and GOPs. A TO BES Cyber System in a TO facility that does not perform or does not
have an agreement with a TOP to perform any of these functional tasks does not meet the
definition of a Control Center. However, if that BES Cyber System operates any of the facilities
that meet criteria in the Medium Impact category, that BES Cyber System would be categorized
as a Medium Impact BES Cyber System.
The 3000 MW threshold defined in criterion 1.2 for BA Control Centers provides a sufficient
differentiation of the threshold defined for Medium Impact BA Control Centers. An analysis of
BA footprints shows that the majority of Bas with significant impact are covered under this
criterion.
Additional thresholds as specified in the criteria apply for this category.
Medium Impact Rating (M)
Generation
The criteria in Attachment 1’s medium impact category that generally apply to Generation Owner
and Operator (GO/GOP) Registered Entities are criteria 2.1, 2.3, 2.6, 2.9, and 2.11. Criterion 2.13
for BA Control Centers is also included here.
 Criterion 2.1 designates as medium impact those BES Cyber Systems that impact generation
with a net Real Power capability exceeding 1500 MW. The 1500 MW criterion is sourced
partly from the Contingency Reserve requirements in NERC standard BAL-002, whose
purpose is “to ensure the Balancing Authority is able to utilize its Contingency Reserve to
balance resources and demand and return Interconnection frequency within defined limits
following a Reportable Disturbance.” In particular, it requires that “as a minimum, the
Balancing Authority or Reserve Sharing Group shall carry at least enough Contingency
Reserve to cover the most severe single contingency.” The drafting team used 1500 MW as
a number derived from the most significant Contingency Reserves operated in various Bas
in all regions.
In the use of net Real Power capability, the drafting team sought to use a value that could be
verified through existing requirements as proposed by NERC standard MOD-024 and current
development efforts in that area.
By using 1500 MW as a bright-line, the intent of the drafting team was to ensure that BES
Cyber Systems with common mode vulnerabilities that could result in the loss of 1500 MW
or more of generation at a single plant for a unit or group of units are adequately protected.
Page 24 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
The drafting team also used additional time and value parameters to ensure the bright-lines
and the values used to measure against them were relatively stable over the review period.
Hence, where multiple values of net Real Power capability could be used for the Facilities’
qualification against these bright-lines, the highest value was used.
 In Criterion 2.3, the drafting team sought to ensure that BES Cyber Systems for those
generation Facilities that have been designated by the Planning Coordinator or
Transmission Planner as necessary to avoid BES Adverse Reliability Impacts in the planning
horizon of one year or more are categorized as medium impact. In specifying a planning
horizon of one year or more, the intent is to ensure that those are units that are identified
as a result of a “long term” reliability planning, i.e that the plans are spanning an operating
period of at least 12 months: it does not mean that the operating day for the unit is
necessarily beyond one year, but that the period that is being planned for is more than 1
year: it is specifically intended to avoid designating generation that is required to be run to
remediate short term emergency reliability issues. These Facilities may be designated as
“Reliability Must Run,” and this designation is distinct from those generation Facilities
designated as “must run” for market stabilization purposes. Because the use of the term
“must run” creates some confusion in many areas, the drafting team chose to avoid using
this term and instead drafted the requirement in more generic reliability language. In
particular, the focus on preventing an Adverse Reliability Impact dictates that these units
are designated as must run for reliability purposes beyond the local area. Those units
designated as must run for voltage support in the local area would not generally be given
this designation. In cases where there is no designated Planning Coordinator, the
Transmission Planner is included as the Registered Entity that performs this designation.
If it is determined through System studies that a unit must run in order to preserve the
reliability of the BES, such as due to a Category C3 contingency as defined in TPL-003, then
BES Cyber Systems for that unit are categorized as medium impact.
The TPL standards require that, where the studies and plans indicate additional actions, that
these studies and plans be communicated by the Planning Coordinator or Transmission
Planner in writing to the Regional Entity/RRO. Actions necessary for the implementation of
these plans by affected parties (generation owners/operators and Reliability Coordinators
or other necessary party) are usually formalized in the form of an agreement and/or
contract.
 Criterion 2.6 includes BES Cyber Systems for those Generation Facilities that have been
identified as critical to the derivation of IROLs and their associated contingencies, as
specified by FAC-014-2, Establish and Communicate System Operating Limits, R5.1.1 and
R5.1.3.
IROLs may be based on dynamic System phenomena such as instability or voltage collapse.
Derivation of these IROLs and their associated contingencies often considers the effect of
generation inertia and AVR response.
Page 25 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
 Criterion 2.9 categorizes BES Cyber Systems for Special Protection Systems and Remedial
Action Schemes as medium impact. Special Protection Systems and Remedial Action
Schemes may be implemented to prevent disturbances that would result in exceeding IROLs
if they do not provide the function required at the time it is required or if it operates
outside of the parameters it was designed for. Generation Owners and Generator Operators
which own BES Cyber Systems for such Systems and schemes designate them as medium
impact.
 Criterion 2.11 categorizes as medium impact BES Cyber Systems used by and at Control
Centers that perform the functional obligations of the Generator Operator for an aggregate
generation of 1500 MW or higher in a single interconnection, and that have not already
been included in Part 1.
 Criterion 2.13 categorizes as medium impact those BA Control Centers that “control” 1500
MW of generation or more in a single interconnection and that have not already been
included in Part 1. The 1500 MW threshold is consistent with the impact level and rationale
specified for Criterion 2.1.
Transmission
The SDT uses the phrases “Transmission Facilities at a single station or substation” and
“Transmission stations or substations” to recognize the existence of both stations and
substations. Many entities in industry consider a substation to be a location with physical
borders (i.e. fence, wall, etc.) that contains at least an autotransformer. Locations also exist
that do not contain autotransformers, and many entities in industry refer to those locations as
stations (or switchyards). Therefore, the SDT chose to use both “station” and “substation” to
refer to the locations where groups of Transmission Facilities exist.
 Criteria 2.2, 2.4 through 2.10, and 2.12 in Attachment 1 are the criteria that are applicable to
Transmission Owners and Operators. In many of the criteria, the impact threshold is defined
as the capability of the failure or compromise of a System to result in exceeding one or more
Interconnection Reliability Operating Limits (IROLs). Criterion 2.2 includes BES Cyber Systems
for those Facilities in Transmission Systems that provide reactive resources to enhance and
preserve the reliability of the BES. The nameplate value is used here because there is no
NERC requirement to verify actual capability of these Facilities. The value of 1000 MVARs
used in this criterion is a value deemed reasonable for the purpose of determining criticality.
 Criterion 2.4 includes BES Cyber Systems for any Transmission Facility at a substation
operated at 500 kV or higher. While the drafting team felt that Facilities operated at 500 kV
or higher did not require any further qualification for their role as components of the
backbone on the Interconnected BES, Facilities in the lower EHV range should have additional
qualifying criteria for inclusion in the medium impact category.
Page 26 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
It must be noted that if the collector bus for a generation plant (i.e. the plant is smaller in
aggregate than the threshold set for generation in Criterion 2.1) is operated at 500kV, the
collector bus should be considered a Generation Interconnection Facility, and not a
Transmission Facility, according to the “Final Report from the Ad Hoc Group for Generation
Requirements at the Transmission Interface.” This collector bus would not be a facility for a
medium impact BES Cyber System because it does not significantly affect the 500kV
Transmission grid; it only affects a plant which is below the generation threshold.
 Criterion 2.5 includes BES Cyber Systems for facilities at the lower end of BES Transmission
with qualifications for inclusion if they are deemed highly likely to have significant impact on
the BES. While the criterion has been specified as part of the rationale for requiring
protection for significant impact on the BES, the drafting team included, in this criterion,
additional qualifications that would ensure the required level of impact to the BES. The
drafting team:
 Excluded radial facilities that would only provide support for single generation
facilities.
 Specified interconnection to at least three transmission stations or substations to
ensure that the level of impact would be appropriate.
The total aggregated weighted value of 3,000 was derived from weighted values related to
three connected 345 kV lines and five connected 230 kV lines at a transmission station or
substation. The total aggregated weighted value is used to account for the true impact to the
BES, irrespective of line kV rating and mix of multiple kV rated lines.
Additionally, in NERC’s document “Integrated Risk Assessment Approach – Refinement to
Severity Risk Index”, Attachment 1, the report used an average MVA line loading based on
kV rating:
 230 kV –> 700 MVA
 345 kV –> 1,300 MVA
 500 kV –> 2,000 MVA
 765 kV –> 3,000 MVA
In the terms of applicable lines and connecting “other Transmission stations or substations”
determinations, the following should be considered:
 For autotransformers in a station, Responsible Entities have flexibility in determining
whether the groups of Facilities are considered a single substation or station
location or multiple substations or stations. In most cases, Responsible Entities
would probably consider them as Facilities at a single substation or station unless
geographically dispersed. In these cases of these transformers being within the
“fence” of the substation or station, autotransformers may not count as separate
Page 27 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
connections to other stations. The use of common BES Cyber Systems may negate
any rationale for any consideration otherwise. In the case of autotransformers that
are geographically dispersed from a station location, the calculation would take into
account the connections in and out of each station or substation location.
 Multiple-point (or multiple-tap) lines are considered to contribute a single weight
value per line and affect the number of connections to other stations. Therefore, a
single 230 kV multiple-point line between three Transmission stations or substations
would contribute an aggregated weighted value of 700 and connect Transmission
Facilities at a single station or substation to two other Transmission stations or
substations.
 Multiple lines between two Transmission stations or substations are considered to
contribute multiple weight values per line, but these multiple lines between the two
stations only connect one station to one other station. Therefore, two 345 kV lines
between two Transmission stations or substations would contribute an aggregated
weighted value of 2600 and connect Transmission Facilities at a single station or
substation to one other Transmission station or substation.
Criterion 2.5’s qualification for Transmission Facilities at a Transmission station or
substation is based on 2 distinct conditions.
1. The first condition is that Transmission Facilities at a single station or substation
where that station or substation connect, at voltage levels of 200 kV or higher
to three (3) other stations or substations, to three other stations or substations.
This qualification is meant to ensure that connections that operate at voltages
of 500 kV or higher are included in the count of connections to other stations or
substations as well.
2. The second qualification is that the aggregate value of all lines entering or
leaving the station or substation must exceed 3000. This qualification does not
include the consideration of lines operating at lower than 200 kV, or 500 kV or
higher, the latter already qualifying as medium impact under criterion 2.4. :
there is no value to be assigned to lines at voltages of less than 200 kV or 500 kV
or higher in the table of values for the contribution to the aggregate value of
3000.
The Transmission Facilities at the station or substation must meet both qualifications to be
considered as qualified under criterion 2.5.
 Criterion 2.6 include BES Cyber Systems for those Transmission Facilities that have been
identified as critical to the derivation of IROLs and their associated contingencies, as specified
by FAC-014-2, Establish and Communicate System Operating Limits, R5.1.1 and R5.1.3.
Page 28 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
 Criterion 2.7 is sourced from the NUC-001 NERC standard, Requirement R9.2.2, for the
support of Nuclear Facilities. NUC-001 ensures that reliability of NPIR’s are ensured through
adequate coordination between the Nuclear Generator Owner/Operator and its
Transmission provider “for the purpose of ensuring nuclear plant safe operation and
shutdown.” In particular, there are specific requirements to coordinate physical and cyber
security protection of these interfaces.
 Criterion 2.8 designates as medium impact those BES Cyber Systems that impact Transmission
Facilities necessary to directly support generation that meet the criteria in Criteria 2.1
(generation Facilities with output greater than 1500 MW) and 2.3 (generation Facilities
generally designated as “must run” for wide area reliability in the planning horizon). The
Responsible Entity can request a formal statement from the Generation owner as to the
qualification of generation Facilities connected to their Transmission systems.
 Criterion 2.9 designates as medium impact those BES Cyber Systems for those Special
Protection Systems (SPS), Remedial Action Schemes (RAS), or automated switching Systems
installed to ensure BES operation within IROLs. The degradation, compromise or
unavailability of these BES Cyber Systems would result in exceeding IROLs if they fail to
operate as designed. By the definition of IROL, the loss or compromise of any of these have
Wide Area impacts.
 Criterion 2.10 designates as medium impact those BES Cyber Systems for Systems or
Elements that perform automatic Load shedding, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more. The SDT spent considerable time discussing the wording of Criterion 2.10, and
chose the term “Each” to represent that the criterion applied to a discrete System or Facility.
In the drafting of this criterion, the drafting team sought to include only those Systems that
did not require human operator initiation, and targeted in particular those underfrequency
load shedding (UFLS) Facilities and systems and undervoltage load shedding (UVLS) systems
and Elements that would be subject to a regional Load shedding requirement to prevent
Adverse Reliability Impact. These include automated UFLS systems or UVLS systems that are
capable of Load shedding 300 MW or more. It should be noted that those qualifying systems
which require a human operator to arm the system, but once armed, trigger automatically,
are still to be considered as not requiring human operator initiation and should be designated
as medium impact. The 300 MW threshold has been defined as the aggregate of the highest
MW Load value, as defined by the applicable regional Load Shedding standards, for the
preceding 12 months to account for seasonal fluctuations.
This particular threshold (300 MW) was provided in CIP, Version 1. The SDT believes that the
threshold should be lower than the 1500MW generation requirement since it is specifically
addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk Electric System and
hence requires a lower threshold. A review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional
reliability standards for UFLS program requirements to date indicates that the historical value
of 300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
Page 29 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
In ERCOT, the Load acting as a Resource (“LaaR”) Demand Response Program is not part of
the regional load shedding program, but an ancillary services market. In general, similar
demand response programs that are not part of the NERC or regional reliability Load shedding
programs, but are offered as components of an ancillary services market do not qualify under
this criterion.
The language used in section 4 for UVLS and UFLS and in criterion 2.10 of Attachment 1 is
designed to be consistent with requirements set in the PRC standards for UFLS and UVLS.
 Criterion 2.12 categorizes as medium impact those BES Cyber Systems used by and at Control
Centers and associated data centers performing the functional obligations of a Transmission
Operator and that have not already been categorized as high impact.
 Criterion 2.13 categorizes as Medium Impact those BA Control Centers that “control” 1500
MW of generation or more in a single Interconnection. The 1500 MW threshold is consistent
with the impact level and rationale specified for Criterion 2.1.
Low Impact Rating (L)
BES Cyber Systems not categorized in high impact or medium impact default to low impact. Note
that low impact BES Cyber Systems do not require discrete identification.
Restoration Facilities
 Several discussions on the CIP Version 5 standards suggest entities owning Blackstart
Resources and Cranking Paths might elect to remove those services to avoid higher
compliance costs. For example, one Reliability Coordinator reported a 25% reduction of
Blackstart Resources as a result of the Version 1 language, and there could be more entities
that make this choice under Version 5.
In response, the CIP Version 5 drafting team sought informal input from NERC’s Operating
and Planning Committees. The committees indicate there has already been a reduction in
Blackstart Resources because of increased CIP compliance costs, environmental rules, and
other risks; continued inclusion within Version 5 at a category that would very significantly
increase compliance costs can result in further reduction of a vulnerable pool.
The drafting team moved from the categorization of restoration assets such as Blackstart
Resources and Cranking Paths as medium impact (as was the case in earlier drafts) to
categorization of these assets as low impact as a result of these considerations. This will not
relieve asset owners of all responsibilities, as would have been the case in CIP-002, Versions
1-4 (since only Cyber Assets with routable connectivity which are essential to restoration
assets are included in those versions). Under the low impact categorization, those assets will
be protected in the areas of cyber security awareness, physical access control, and electronic
access control, and they will have obligations regarding incident response. This represents a
net gain to bulk power system reliability, however, since many of those assets do not meet
criteria for inclusion under Versions 1-4.
Page 30 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Weighing the risks to overall BES reliability, the drafting team determined that this re-
categorization represents the option that would be the least detrimental to restoration
function and, thus, overall BES reliability. Removing Blackstart Resources and Cranking Paths
from medium impact promotes overall reliability, as the likely alternative is fewer Blackstart
Resources supporting timely restoration when needed.
BES Cyber Systems for generation resources that have been designated as Blackstart
Resources in the Transmission Operator’s restoration plan default to low impact. NERC
Standard EOP-005-2 requires the Transmission Operator to have a Restoration Plan and to
list its Blackstart Resources in its plan, as well as requirements to test these Resources. This
criterion designates only those generation Blackstart Resources that have been designated
as such in the Transmission Operator’s restoration plan. The glossary term Blackstart
Capability Plan has been retired.
Regarding concerns of communication to BES Asset Owners and Operators of their role in the
Restoration Plan, Transmission Operators are required in NERC Standard EOP-005-2 to
“provide the entities identified in its approved restoration plan with a description of any
changes to their roles and specific tasks prior to the implementation date of the plan.”
 BES Cyber Systems for Facilities and Elements comprising the Cranking Paths and meeting the
initial switching requirements from the Blackstart Resource to the first Interconnection point
of the generation unit(s) to be started, as identified in the Transmission Operator’s
restoration plan, default to the category of low impact: however, these systems are explicitly
called out to ensure consideration for inclusion in the scope of the version 5 CIP standards.
This requirement for inclusion in the scope is sourced from requirements in NERC standard
EOP-005-2, which requires the Transmission Operator to include in its Restoration Plan the
Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements from the Blackstart Resource and the
unit(s) to be started.
Distribution Providers may note that they may have BES Cyber Systems that must be scoped
in if they have Elements listed in the Transmission Operator’s Restoration Plan that are
components of the Cranking Path.
Page 31 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Use Case: CIP Process Flow
The following CIP use case process flow for a generator Operator/Owner was provided by a
participant in the development of the Version 5 standards and is provided here as an example
of a process used to identify and categorize BES Cyber Systems and BES Cyber Assets; review,
develop, and implement strategies to mitigate overall risks; and apply applicable security
controls.
Page 32 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Rationale:
During development of this standard, text boxes were embedded within the standard to explain
the rationale for various parts of the standard. Upon BOT approval, the text from the rationale
text boxes was moved to this section.
Rationale for R1:
BES Cyber Systems at each site location have varying impact on the reliable operation of the
Bulk Electric System. Attachment 1 provides a set of “bright-line” criteria that the Responsible
Entity must use to identify these BES Cyber Systems in accordance with the impact on the BES.
BES Cyber Systems must be identified and categorized according to their impact so that the
appropriate measures can be applied, commensurate with their impact. These impact
categories will be the basis for the application of appropriate requirements in CIP-003-CIP-011.
Rationale for R2:
The lists required by Requirement R1 are reviewed on a periodic basis to ensure that all BES
Cyber Systems required to be categorized have been properly identified and categorized. The
miscategorization or non-categorization of a BES Cyber System can lead to the application of
inadequate or non-existent cyber security controls that can lead to compromise or misuse that
can affect the real-time operation of the BES. The CIP Senior Manager’s approval ensures
proper oversight of the process by the appropriate Responsible Entity personnel.
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the
requirements and to bring the
compliance elements into conformance
with the latest guidelines for developing
compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business
judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
Responsible Entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated version number from -2 to -3. Update
Page 33 of 37
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Approved by the NERC Board of
Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 12/30/10 Modified to add specific criteria for Update
Critical Asset identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Update
Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Modified to
Trustees. coordinate with
other CIP
standards and to
revise format to
use RBS
Template.
5.1 9/30/13 Replaced “Devices” with “Systems” in a Errata
definition in background section.
5.1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-002-
5.1.
5.1a 11/02/16 Adopted by the NERC Board of
Trustees.
5.1a 12/14/2016 FERC letter Order approving CIP-002-
5.1a. Docket No. RD17-2-000.
Page 34 of 37
Appendix 1
Appendix 1
Requirement Number and Text of Requirement
CIP-002-5.1, Requirement R1
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement a process that considers each of the following
assets for purposes of parts 1.1 through 1.3:
i. Control Centers and backup Control Centers;
ii. Transmission stations and substations;
iii. Generation resources;
iv. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart Resources
and Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements;
v. Special Protection Systems that support the reliable operation of the Bulk Electric
System; and
vi. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability section
4.2.1 above.
1.1. Identify each of the high impact BES Cyber Systems according to Attachment 1, Section
1, if any, at each asset;
1.2. Identify each of the medium impact BES Cyber Systems according to Attachment 1,
Section 2, if any, at each asset; and
1.3. Identify each asset that contains a low impact BES Cyber System according to
Attachment 1, Section 3, if any (a discrete list of low impact BES Cyber Systems is not
required).
Attachment 1, Criterion 2.1
2. Medium Impact Rating (M)
Each BES Cyber System, not included in Section 1 above, associated with any of the
following:
2.1. Commissioned generation, by each group of generating units at a single plant location,
with an aggregate highest rated net Real Power capability of the preceding 12 calendar
months equal to or exceeding 1500 MW in a single Interconnection. For each group of
generating units, the only BES Cyber Systems that meet this criterion are those shared
BES Cyber Systems that could, within 15 minutes, adversely impact the reliable
operation of any combination of units that in aggregate equal or exceed 1500 MW in a
single Interconnection.
Appendix 1
Questions
Energy Sector Security Consortium, Inc. (EnergySec) submitted a Request for Interpretation
(RFI) seeking clarification of Criterion 2.1 of Attachment 1 in Reliability Standard CIP-002-5.1
regarding the use of the phrase “shared BES Cyber Systems.”
The Interpretation Drafting Team identified the following questions in the RFI:
1. Whether the phrase “shared BES Cyber Systems” means that the evaluation for Criterion
2.1 shall be performed individually for each discrete BES Cyber System at a single plant
location, or collectively for groups of BES Cyber Systems?
2. Whether the phrase “shared BES Cyber Systems” refers to discrete BES Cyber Systems
that are shared by multiple units, or groups of BES Cyber Systems that could collectively
impact multiple units?
3. If the phrase applies collectively to groups of BES Cyber Systems, what criteria should be
used to determine which BES Cyber Systems should be grouped for collective
evaluation?
Responses
Question 1: Whether the phrase “shared BES Cyber Systems,” means that the evaluation for
Criterion 2.1 shall be performed individually for each discrete BES Cyber System at a single
plant location, or collectively for groups of BES Cyber Systems?
The evaluation as to whether a BES Cyber System is shared should be performed individually for
each discrete BES Cyber System. In the standard language of CIP-002-5.1, there is no reference
to or obligation to group BES Cyber Systems. Requirement R1, part 1.2 states “Identify each of
the medium impact BES Cyber Systems according to Attachment 1, Section 2…” Further, the
preamble of Section 2 of CIP-002-5.1 Attachment 1 states “Each BES Cyber System…associated
with any of the following [criteria].” (emphasis added)
Additionally, the Background section of CIP-002-5.1 states that “[i]t is left up to the Responsible
Entity to determine the level of granularity at which to identify a BES Cyber System within the
qualifications in the definition of BES Cyber System.” The Background section also provides:
The Responsible Entity should take into consideration the operational
environment and scope of management when defining the BES Cyber System
boundary in order to maximize efficiency in secure operations. Defining the
boundary too tightly may result in redundant paperwork and authorizations,
while defining the boundary too broadly could make the secure operation of the
BES Cyber System difficult to monitor and assess.
Page 36 of 37
Appendix 1
Question 2: Whether the phrase “shared BES Cyber Systems” refers to discrete BES Cyber
Systems that are shared by multiple units, or groups of BES Cyber Systems that could
collectively impact multiple units?
The phrase “shared BES Cyber Systems” refers to discrete BES Cyber Systems that are shared by
multiple generation units.
The use of the term “shared” is also clarified in the NERC Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
document issued by NERC Compliance to support implementation of the CIP Reliability
Standards. FAQ #49 provides:
Shared BES Cyber Systems are those that are associated with any combination of units
in a single Interconnection, as referenced in CIP-002-5.1, Attachment 1, impact rating
criteria 2.1 and 2.2. For criterion 2.1 “BES Cyber Systems that could, within 15 minutes,
adversely impact the reliable operation of any combination of units that in aggregate
equal or exceed 1500 MW in a single Interconnection.” For criterion 2.2: “BES Cyber
Systems that could, within 15 minutes, adversely impact the reliable operation of any
combination of resources that in aggregate equal or exceed 1000 MVAR. Also refer to
the Lesson Learned for CIP-002-5.1 Requirement R1: Impact Rating of Generation
Resource Shared BES Cyber Systems for further information and examples.
Question 3: If the phrase applies collectively to groups of BES Cyber Systems, what criteria
should be used to determine which BES Cyber Systems should be grouped for collective
evaluation?
The phrase applies to each discrete BES Cyber System.
Page 37 of 37
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-002-5.1a.pdf ---

--- START DOCUMENT: cip-003-8.pdf ---
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
2. Number: CIP-003-8
3. Purpose: To specify consistent and sustainable security management controls that
establish responsibility and accountability to protect BES Cyber Systems
against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk
Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or subset
of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional entity or
entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load
shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity, without
human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station service
of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
Page 1 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity, without
human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements in a
NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station service
of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-003-8:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security Perimeters
(ESPs).
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant
to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not
included in section 4.2.1 above.
Page 2 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
5. Effective Dates:
See Implementation Plan for CIP-003-8.
6. Background:
Standard CIP-003 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber security, which
require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems and require
organizational, operational, and procedural controls to mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
The term policy refers to one or a collection of written documents that are used to
communicate the Responsible Entities’ management goals, objectives and expectations for
how the Responsible Entity will protect its BES Cyber Systems. The use of policies also
establishes an overall governance foundation for creating a culture of security and
compliance with laws, regulations, and standards.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any naming
or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements. An entity should include
as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes, but it must address the
applicable requirements.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes where
it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented processes
describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident response plans and
recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an approach involving multiple
procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of its
policies, plans, and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the standards
include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training program. The full
implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Reliability Standards could also be referred to as a
program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any additional requirements
beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for multiple
high, medium, and low impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single cyber security
awareness program could meet the requirements across multiple BES Cyber Systems.
Measures provide examples of evidence to show documentation and implementation of the
requirement. These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the requirements and
measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered items are items that are
linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and UVLS.
This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version 1 of the CIP
Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is specifically
addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the BES. A review of UFLS
Page 3 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
tolerances defined within Regional Reliability Standards for UFLS program requirements to
date indicates that the historical value of 300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable
threshold value for allowable UFLS operational tolerances.
Page 4 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager approval at least
once every 15 calendar months for one or more documented cyber security policies
that collectively address the following topics: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. For its high impact and medium impact BES Cyber Systems, if any:
1.1.1. Personnel and training (CIP-004);
1.1.2. Electronic Security Perimeters (CIP-005) including Interactive Remote
Access;
1.1.3. Physical security of BES Cyber Systems (CIP-006);
1.1.4. System security management (CIP-007);
1.1.5. Incident reporting and response planning (CIP-008);
1.1.6. Recovery plans for BES Cyber Systems (CIP-009);
1.1.7. Configuration change management and vulnerability assessments (CIP-
010);
1.1.8. Information protection (CIP-011); and
1.1.9. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
1.2. For its assets identified in CIP-002 containing low impact BES Cyber Systems, if
any:
1.2.1. Cyber security awareness;
1.2.2. Physical security controls;
1.2.3. Electronic access controls;
1.2.4. Cyber Security Incident response;
1.2.5. Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media malicious code risk
mitigation; and
1.2.6. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
M1. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, policy documents; revision
history, records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management
system that indicate review of each cyber security policy at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager for each cyber
security policy.
R2. Each Responsible Entity with at least one asset identified in CIP-002 containing low
impact BES Cyber Systems shall implement one or more documented cyber security
plan(s) for its low impact BES Cyber Systems that include the sections in Attachment 1.
[Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
Page 5 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Note: An inventory, list, or discrete identification of low impact BES Cyber Systems or
their BES Cyber Assets is not required. Lists of authorized users are not required.
M2. Evidence shall include each of the documented cyber security plan(s) that collectively
include each of the sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation of the cyber security plan(s). Additional examples of evidence per
section are located in Attachment 2.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall identify a CIP Senior Manager by name and document
any change within 30 calendar days of the change. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated and approved
document from a high level official designating the name of the individual identified
as the CIP Senior Manager.
R4. The Responsible Entity shall implement a documented process to delegate authority,
unless no delegations are used. Where allowed by the CIP Standards, the CIP Senior
Manager may delegate authority for specific actions to a delegate or delegates. These
delegations shall be documented, including the name or title of the delegate, the
specific actions delegated, and the date of the delegation; approved by the CIP Senior
Manager; and updated within 30 days of any change to the delegation. Delegation
changes do not need to be reinstated with a change to the delegator. [Violation Risk
Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M4. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated document,
approved by the CIP Senior Manager, listing individuals (by name or title) who are
delegated the authority to approve or authorize specifically identified items.
Page 6 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring
and enforcing compliance with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show
that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
• Compliance Audits
• Self-Certifications
• Spot Checking
• Compliance Investigations
• Self-Reporting
• Complaints
1.4. Additional Compliance Information:
None.
Page 7 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Operations Medium The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible Entity The Responsible
Planning Entity documented Entity documented documented and Entity documented
and implemented and implemented implemented one or and implemented
one or more cyber one or more cyber more cyber security one or more cyber
security policies for security policies for policies for its high security policies for
its high impact and its high impact and impact and medium its high impact and
medium impact BES medium impact BES impact BES Cyber medium impact BES
Cyber Systems, but Cyber Systems, but Systems, but did not Cyber Systems, but
did not address one did not address two address three of the nine did not address four
of the nine topics of the nine topics topics required by R1. or more of the nine
required by R1. required by R1. (R1.1) topics required by
(R1.1) (R1.1) R1. (R1.1)
OR
OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity
The Responsible The Responsible did not complete its The Responsible
Entity did not Entity did not review of the one or Entity did not have
complete its review complete its review more documented cyber any documented
of the one or more of the one or more security policies for its cyber security
documented cyber documented cyber high impact and medium policies for its high
security policies for security policies for impact BES Cyber impact and medium
its high impact and its high impact and Systems as required by impact BES Cyber
medium impact BES medium impact BES R1 within 17 calendar Systems as required
Cyber Systems as Cyber Systems as months but did by R1. (R1.1)
required by R1 required by R1 complete this review in
OR
within 15 calendar within 16 calendar less than or equal to 18
The Responsible
months but did months but did
Entity did not
Page 8 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
complete this review complete this review calendar months of the complete its review
in less than or equal in less than or equal previous review. (R1.1) of the one or more
to 16 calendar to 17 calendar documented cyber
OR
months of the months of the security policies as
The Responsible Entity
previous review. previous review. required by R1
did not complete its
(R1.1) (R1.1) within 18 calendar
approval of the one or
months of the
OR OR
more documented cyber
previous review. (R1)
The Responsible The Responsible security policies for its
OR
Entity did not Entity did not high impact and medium
complete its complete its impact BES Cyber The Responsible
approval of the one approval of the one Systems as required by Entity did not
or more documented or more R1 by the CIP Senior complete its
cyber security documented cyber Manager within 17 approval of the one
policies for its high security policies for calendar months but did or more
impact and medium its high impact and complete this approval documented cyber
impact BES Cyber medium impact BES in less than or equal to security policies for
Systems as required Cyber Systems as 18 calendar months of its high impact and
by R1 by the CIP required by R1 by the previous approval. medium impact BES
Senior Manager the CIP Senior (R1) Cyber Systems as
within 15 calendar Manager within 16 required by R1 by
OR
months but did calendar months but the CIP Senior
The Responsible Entity
complete this did complete this Manager within 18
documented one or
approval in less than approval in less than calendar months of
more cyber security
or equal to 16 or equal to 17 the previous
policies for its assets
calendar months of calendar months of approval. (R1.1)
identified in CIP-002
the previous the previous
OR
containing low impact
approval. (R1.1) approval. (R1.1)
Page 9 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
OR OR BES Cyber Systems, but The Responsible
did not address three of Entity documented
The Responsible The Responsible
the six topics required by one or more cyber
Entity documented Entity documented
R1. (R1.2) security policies for
one or more cyber one or more cyber
its assets identified
security policies for security policies for OR
in CIP-002 containing
its assets identified its assets identified
The Responsible Entity
low impact BES
in CIP-002 containing in CIP-002 containing
did not complete its
Cyber Systems, but
low impact BES low impact BES
review of the one or
did not address four
Cyber Systems, but Cyber Systems, but
more documented cyber
or more of the six
did not address one did not address two
security policies for its
topics required by
of the six topics of the six topics
assets identified in CIP-
R1. (R1.2)
required by R1. required by R1.
002 containing low
(R1.2) (R1.2) OR
impact BES Cyber
OR OR Systems as required by The Responsible
R1 within 17 calendar Entity did not have
The Responsible The Responsible
months but did any documented
Entity did not Entity did not
complete this review in cyber security
complete its review complete its review
less than or equal to 18 policies for its assets
of the one or more of the one or more
calendar months of the identified in CIP-002
documented cyber documented cyber
previous review. (R1.2) containing low
security policies for security policies for
impact BES Cyber
its assets identified its assets identified OR
Systems as required
in CIP-002 containing in CIP-002 containing
The Responsible Entity
by R1. (R1.2)
low impact BES low impact BES
did not complete its
Cyber Systems as Cyber Systems as OR
approval of the one or
required by required by
more documented cyber The Responsible
Requirement R1 Requirement R1
security policies for its Entity did not
within 15 calendar within 16 calendar
Page 10 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
months but did months but did assets identified in CIP- complete its
complete this review complete this review 002 containing low approval of the one
in less than or equal in less than or equal impact BES Cyber or more
to 16 calendar to 17 calendar Systems as required by documented cyber
months of the months of the Requirement R1 by the security policies for
previous review. previous review. CIP Senior Manager its assets identified
(R1.2) (R1.2) within 17 calendar in CIP-002 containing
months but did low impact BES
OR OR
complete this approval Cyber Systems as
The Responsible The Responsible
in less than or equal to required by
Entity did not Entity did not
18 calendar months of Requirement R1 by
complete its complete its
the previous approval. the CIP Senior
approval of the one approval of the one
(R1.2) Manager within 18
or more documented or more
calendar months of
cyber security documented cyber
the previous
policies for its assets security policies for
approval. (R1.2)
identified in CIP-002 its assets identified
containing low in CIP-002 containing
impact BES Cyber low impact BES
Systems as required Cyber Systems as
by Requirement R1 required by
by the CIP Senior Requirement R1 by
Manager within 15 the CIP Senior
calendar months but Manager within 16
did complete this calendar months but
approval in less than did complete this
or equal to 16 approval in less than
calendar months of or equal to 17
Page 11 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
the previous calendar months of
approval. (R1.2) the previous
approval. (R1.2)
R2 Operations Lower The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible Entity The Responsible
Planning Entity documented Entity documented documented the physical Entity failed to
its cyber security its cyber security access controls for its document and
plan(s) for its assets plan(s) for its assets assets containing low implement one or
containing low containing low impact BES Cyber more cyber security
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber Systems, but failed to plan(s) for its assets
Systems, but failed Systems, but failed implement the physical containing low
to document cyber to reinforce cyber security controls impact BES Cyber
security awareness security practices at according to Systems according to
according to least once every 15 Requirement R2, Requirement R2,
Requirement R2, calendar months Attachment 1, Section 2. Attachment 1. (R2)
Attachment 1, according to (R2)
Section 1. (R2) Requirement R2,
OR
Attachment 1,
OR
The Responsible Entity
Section 1. (R2)
The Responsible documented its cyber
OR
Entity implemented security plan(s) for
electronic access The Responsible electronic access
controls but failed to Entity documented controls for its assets
document its cyber its cyber security containing low impact
security plan(s) for plan(s) for its assets BES Cyber Systems, but
electronic access containing low failed to permit only
controls according to impact BES Cyber necessary inbound and
Requirement R2, Systems, but failed outbound electronic
Page 12 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Attachment 1, to document access controls
Section 3. (R2) physical security according to
controls according to Requirement R2,
OR
Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section
The Responsible
Attachment 1, 3.1. (R2)
Entity documented
Section 2. (R2)
OR
its cyber security
OR
plan(s) for its assets The Responsible Entity
containing low The Responsible documented one or
impact BES Cyber Entity documented more Cyber Security
Systems, but failed its cyber security Incident response plan(s)
to document one or plan(s) for its assets within its cyber security
more Cyber Security containing low plan(s) for its assets
Incident response impact BES Cyber containing low impact
plan(s) according to Systems, but failed BES Cyber Systems, but
Requirement R2, to document failed to test each Cyber
Attachment 1, electronic access Security Incident
Section 4. (R2) controls according to response plan(s) at least
Requirement R2, once every 36 calendar
OR
Attachment 1, months according to
The Responsible
Section 3. (R2) Requirement R2,
Entity documented
Attachment 1, Section 4.
OR
one or more Cyber
(R2)
Security Incident The Responsible
OR
response plan(s) Entity documented
within its cyber its cyber security The Responsible Entity
security plan(s) for plan(s) for electronic documented the
its assets containing access controls but determination of
Page 13 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
low impact BES failed to implement whether an identified
Cyber Systems, but authentication for all Cyber Security Incident is
failed to update each Dial-up Connectivity a Reportable Cyber
Cyber Security that provides access Security Incident, but
Incident response to low impact BES failed to notify the
plan(s) within 180 Cyber System(s), per Electricity Information
days according to Cyber Asset Sharing and Analysis
Requirement R2, capability according Center (E-ISAC)
Attachment 1, to Requirement R2, according to
Section 4. (R2) Attachment 1, Requirement R2,
Section 3.2 (R2) Attachment 1, Section 4.
OR
(R2)
OR
The Responsible
OR
Entity documented The Responsible
its plan(s) for Entity documented The Responsible Entity
Transient Cyber one or more incident documented its plan(s)
Assets and response plan(s) for Transient Cyber
Removable Media, within its cyber Assets and Removable
but failed to manage security plan(s) for Media, but failed to
its Transient Cyber its assets containing implement mitigation for
Asset(s) according to low impact BES the introduction of
Requirement R2, Cyber Systems, but malicious code for
Attachment 1, failed to include the Transient Cyber Assets
Section 5.1. (R2) process for managed by the
identification, Responsible Entity
OR
classification, and according to
The Responsible
response to Cyber Requirement R2,
Entity documented
Security Incidents
Page 14 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
its plan(s) for according to Attachment 1, Section
Transient Cyber Requirement R2, 5.1. (R2)
Assets, but failed to Attachment 1,
OR
document the Section 4. (R2)
The Responsible Entity
Removable Media
OR
documented its plan(s)
section(s) according
The Responsible for Transient Cyber
to Requirement R2,
Entity documented Assets and Removable
Attachment 1,
its cyber security Media, but failed to
Section 5.3. (R2)
plan(s) for its assets implement mitigation for
containing low the introduction of
impact BES Cyber malicious code for
Systems, but failed Transient Cyber Assets
to document the managed by a party
determination of other than the
whether an Responsible Entity
identified Cyber according to
Security Incident is a Requirement R2,
Reportable Cyber Attachment 1, Section
Security Incident and 5.2. (R2)
subsequent
OR
notification to the
The Responsible Entity
Electricity
documented its plan(s)
Information Sharing
for Transient Cyber
and Analysis Center
Assets and Removable
(E-ISAC) according to
Media, but failed to
Requirement R2,
implement mitigation for
Page 15 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Attachment 1, the threat of detected
Section 4. (R2) malicious code on the
Removable Media prior
OR
to connecting
The Responsible
Removable Media to a
Entity documented
low impact BES Cyber
its plan(s) for
System according to
Transient Cyber
Requirement R2,
Assets and
Attachment 1, Section
Removable Media,
5.3. (R2)
but failed to
document mitigation
for the introduction
of malicious code for
Transient Cyber
Assets managed by
the Responsible
Entity according to
Requirement R2,
Attachment 1,
Sections 5.1 and 5.3.
(R2)
OR
The Responsible
Entity documented
its plan(s) for
Transient Cyber
Page 16 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Assets and
Removable Media,
but failed to
document mitigation
for the introduction
of malicious code for
Transient Cyber
Assets managed by a
party other than the
Responsible Entity
according to
Requirement R2,
Attachment 1,
Section 5.2. (R2)
OR
The Responsible
Entity documented
its plan(s) for
Transient Cyber
Assets and
Removable Media,
but failed to
implement the
Removable Media
section(s) according
to Requirement R2,
Page 17 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Attachment 1,
Section 5.3. (R2)
R3 Operations Medium The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible Entity The Responsible
Planning Entity has identified Entity has identified has identified by name a Entity has not
by name a CIP Senior by name a CIP Senior CIP Senior Manager, but identified, by name,
Manager, but did not Manager, but did did not document a CIP Senior
document changes not document changes to the CIP Manager.
to the CIP Senior changes to the CIP Senior Manager within
OR
Manager within 30 Senior Manager 50 calendar days but did
The Responsible
calendar days but did within 40 calendar document this change in
Entity has identified
document this days but did less than 60 calendar
by name a CIP Senior
change in less than document this days of the change. (R3)
Manager, but did
40 calendar days of change in less than
not document
the change. (R3) 50 calendar days of
changes to the CIP
the change. (R3)
Senior Manager
within 60 calendar
days of the change.
(R3)
R4 Operations Lower The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible Entity The Responsible
Planning Entity has identified Entity has identified has identified a delegate Entity has used
a delegate by name, a delegate by name, by name, title, date of delegated authority
title, date of title, date of delegation, and specific for actions where
delegation, and delegation, and actions delegated, but allowed by the CIP
specific actions specific actions did not document Standards, but does
delegated, but did delegated, but did changes to the delegate not have a process
Page 18 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-8)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
not document not document within 50 calendar days to delegate actions
changes to the changes to the but did document this from the CIP Senior
delegate within 30 delegate within 40 change in less than 60 Manager. (R4)
calendar days but did calendar days but calendar days of the
OR
document this did document this change. (R4)
The Responsible
change in less than change in less than
Entity has identified
40 calendar days of 50 calendar days of
a delegate by name,
the change. (R4) the change. (R4)
title, date of
delegation, and
specific actions
delegated, but did
not document
changes to the
delegate within 60
calendar days of the
change. (R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
Page 19 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version History
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to 3/24/06
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the
requirements and to bring the
compliance elements into conformance
with the latest guidelines for developing
compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business
judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the
sentence pertaining to removing
component or system from service in
order to perform testing, in response to
FERC order issued September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of
Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of
Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Modified to
Trustees. coordinate with
other CIP
standards and to
revise format to
use RBS Template.
Page 20 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Addressed two
Trustees. FERC directives
from Order No.
791 related to
identify, assess,
and correct
language and
communication
networks.
6 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Replaces the
Trustees. version adopted
by the Board on
11/13/2014.
Revised version
addresses
remaining
directives from
Order No. 791
related to
transient devices
and low impact
BES Cyber
Systems.
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
7 2/9/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Revised to address
Trustees. FERC Order No.
822 directives
regarding (1) the
definition of LERC
and (2) transient
devices.
7 4/19/18 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-7.
Docket No. RM17-11-000
Page 21 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
8 5/9/19 Adopted by the NERC Board of Removed SPS
Trustees. references.
Revised to address
FERC Order No.
843 regarding
mitigating the risk
of malicious code.
8 7/31/2019 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-8.
Docket No. RD19-5-000.
Page 22 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Attachment 1
Required Sections for Cyber Security Plan(s) for Assets Containing Low Impact BES Cyber
Systems
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in the cyber security
plan(s) required under Requirement R2.
Responsible Entities with multiple-impact BES Cyber Systems ratings can utilize policies,
procedures, and processes for their high or medium impact BES Cyber Systems to fulfill the
sections for the development of low impact cyber security plan(s). Each Responsible Entity can
develop a cyber security plan(s) either by individual asset or groups of assets.
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: Each Responsible Entity shall reinforce, at least once
every 15 calendar months, cyber security practices (which may include associated
physical security practices).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Each Responsible Entity shall control physical access,
based on need as determined by the Responsible Entity, to (1) the asset or the
locations of the low impact BES Cyber Systems within the asset, and (2) the Cyber
Asset(s), as specified by the Responsible Entity, that provide electronic access
control(s) implemented for Section 3.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: For each asset containing low impact BES Cyber
System(s) identified pursuant to CIP-002, the Responsible Entity shall implement
electronic access controls to:
3.1 Permit only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access as
determined by the Responsible Entity for any communications that are:
i. between a low impact BES Cyber System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside
the asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s);
ii. using a routable protocol when entering or leaving the asset containing
the low impact BES Cyber System(s); and
iii. not used for time-sensitive protection or control functions between
intelligent electronic devices (e.g., communications using protocol IEC TR-
61850-90-5 R-GOOSE).
3.2 Authenticate all Dial-up Connectivity, if any, that provides access to low
impact BES Cyber System(s), per Cyber Asset capability.
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more
Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), either by asset or group of assets, which
shall include:
4.1 Identification, classification, and response to Cyber Security Incidents;
4.2 Determination of whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and subsequent notification to the
Page 23 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC), unless
prohibited by law;
4.3 Identification of the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security Incident
response by groups or individuals;
4.4 Incident handling for Cyber Security Incidents;
4.5 Testing the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) at least once every 36
calendar months by: (1) responding to an actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; (2) using a drill or tabletop exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; or (3) using an operational exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; and
4.6 Updating the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), if needed, within 180
calendar days after completion of a Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
test or actual Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
Section 5. Transient Cyber Asset and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation: Each
Responsible Entity shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances,
one or more plan(s) to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of the
introduction of malicious code to low impact BES Cyber Systems through the use of
Transient Cyber Assets or Removable Media. The plan(s) shall include:
5.1 For Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by the Responsible Entity, if any, the
use of one or a combination of the following in an ongoing or on-demand
manner (per Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
5.2 For Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a party other than the Responsible
Entity, if any:
5.2.1 Use one or a combination of the following prior to connecting the
Transient Cyber Asset to a low impact BES Cyber System (per
Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review use of live operating system and software executable
only from read-only media;
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
Page 24 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code.
5.2.2 For any method used pursuant to 5.2.1, Responsible Entities shall
determine whether any additional mitigation actions are necessary
and implement such actions prior to connecting the Transient Cyber
Asset.
5.3 For Removable Media, the use of each of the following:
5.3.1 Method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media using a
Cyber Asset other than a BES Cyber System; and
5.3.2 Mitigation of the threat of detected malicious code on the Removable
Media prior to connecting Removable Media to a low impact BES
Cyber System.
Page 25 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Cyber Security Plan(s) for Assets Containing Low Impact BES Cyber
Systems
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: An example of evidence for Section 1 may include, but is
not limited to, documentation that the reinforcement of cyber security practices
occurred at least once every 15 calendar months. The evidence could be
documentation through one or more of the following methods:
• Direct communications (for example, e-mails, memos, or computer-based
training);
• Indirect communications (for example, posters, intranet, or brochures); or
• Management support and reinforcement (for example, presentations or
meetings).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 2 may include, but are
not limited to:
• Documentation of the selected access control(s) (e.g., card key, locks, perimeter
controls), monitoring controls (e.g., alarm systems, human observation), or other
operational, procedural, or technical physical security controls that control
physical access to both:
a. The asset, if any, or the locations of the low impact BES Cyber Systems within
the asset; and
b. The Cyber Asset(s) specified by the Responsible Entity that provide(s)
electronic access controls implemented for Attachment 1, Section 3.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 3 may include, but are
not limited to:
1. Documentation showing that at each asset or group of assets containing low
impact BES Cyber Systems, routable communication between a low impact BES
Cyber System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset is restricted by electronic
access controls to permit only inbound and outbound electronic access that the
Responsible Entity deems necessary, except where an entity provides rationale
that communication is used for time-sensitive protection or control functions
between intelligent electronic devices. Examples of such documentation may
include, but are not limited to representative diagrams that illustrate control of
inbound and outbound communication(s) between the low impact BES Cyber
System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s) or lists of implemented electronic access controls (e.g., access
control lists restricting IP addresses, ports, or services; implementing
unidirectional gateways).
Page 26 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
2. Documentation of authentication for Dial-up Connectivity (e.g., dial out only to a
preprogrammed number to deliver data, dial-back modems, modems that must
be remotely controlled by the control center or control room, or access control
on the BES Cyber System).
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: An example of evidence for Section 4 may include,
but is not limited to, dated documentation, such as policies, procedures, or process
documents of one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) developed
either by asset or group of assets that include the following processes:
1. to identify, classify, and respond to Cyber Security Incidents; to determine
whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident and for notifying the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(E-ISAC);
2. to identify and document the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security
Incident response by groups or individuals (e.g., initiating, documenting,
monitoring, reporting, etc.);
3. for incident handling of a Cyber Security Incident (e.g., containment, eradication,
or recovery/incident resolution);
4. for testing the plan(s) along with the dated documentation that a test has been
completed at least once every 36 calendar months; and
5. to update, as needed, Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) within 180
calendar days after completion of a test or actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident.
Section 5. Transient Cyber Asset and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation:
1. Examples of evidence for Section 5.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern
updates, application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication,
or other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a Transient
Cyber Asset does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the
introduction of malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the
vendor or Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset does
not have the capability.
2. Examples of evidence for Section 5.2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or
procedures that document a review of the installed antivirus update level;
memoranda, electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from
the party other than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update
process, the use of application whitelisting, use of live operating systems or
system hardening performed by the party other than the Responsible Entity;
evidence from change management systems, electronic mail or contracts that
Page 27 of 59
CIP-003-8 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
identifies the Responsible Entity’s acceptance that the practices of the party
other than the Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other
method(s) to mitigate malicious code for Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a
party other than the Responsible Entity. If a Transient Cyber Asset does not have
the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the introduction of malicious code,
evidence may include documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party
other than the Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset
does not have the capability.
Examples of evidence for Attachment 1, Section 5.2.2 may include, but are not
limited to, documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or
contracts that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigation is
necessary and has been implemented prior to connecting the Transient Cyber
Asset managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity.
3. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to detect malicious code such as
results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on-demand
scanning. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.2 may include, but are not limited
to, documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating the threat of
detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the method(s)
used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and the
mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or documented
confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed to be free of
malicious code.
Page 28 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Section 4 – Scope of Applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Standards
Section “4. Applicability” of the standards provides important information for Responsible
Entities to determine the scope of the applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Requirements.
Section “4.1. Functional Entities” is a list of NERC functional entities to which the standard
applies. If the entity is registered as one or more of the functional entities listed in Section 4.1,
then the NERC CIP Cyber Security Standards apply. Note that there is a qualification in Section
4.1 that restricts the applicability in the case of Distribution Providers to only those that own
certain types of systems and equipment listed in 4.2.
Section “4.2. Facilities” defines the scope of the Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by
the Responsible Entity, as qualified in Section 4.1, that is subject to the requirements of the
standard. In addition to the set of BES Facilities, Control Centers, and other systems and
equipment, the list includes the set of systems and equipment owned by Distribution Providers.
While the NERC Glossary term “Facilities” already includes the BES characteristic, the additional
use of the term BES here is meant to reinforce the scope of applicability of these Facilities
where it is used, especially in this applicability scoping section. This in effect sets the scope of
Facilities, systems, and equipment that is subject to the standards.
Requirement R1:
In developing policies in compliance with Requirement R1, the number of policies and their
content should be guided by a Responsible Entity's management structure and operating
conditions. Policies might be included as part of a general information security program for the
entire organization, or as components of specific programs. The Responsible Entity has the
flexibility to develop a single comprehensive cyber security policy covering the required topics,
or it may choose to develop a single high-level umbrella policy and provide additional policy
detail in lower level documents in its documentation hierarchy. In the case of a high-level
umbrella policy, the Responsible Entity would be expected to provide the high-level policy as
well as the additional documentation in order to demonstrate compliance with CIP-003-8,
Requirement R1.
If a Responsible Entity has any high or medium impact BES Cyber Systems, the one or more
cyber security policies must cover the nine subject matter areas required by CIP-003-8,
Requirement R1, Part 1.1. If a Responsible Entity has identified from CIP-002 any assets
containing low impact BES Cyber Systems, the one or more cyber security policies must cover
the six subject matter areas required by Requirement R1, Part 1.2.
Responsible Entities that have multiple-impact rated BES Cyber Systems are not required to
create separate cyber security policies for high, medium, or low impact BES Cyber Systems. The
Responsible Entities have the flexibility to develop policies that cover all three impact ratings.
Implementation of the cyber security policy is not specifically included in CIP-003-8,
Requirement R1 as it is envisioned that the implementation of this policy is evidenced through
successful implementation of CIP-003 through CIP-011. However, Responsible Entities are
encouraged not to limit the scope of their cyber security policies to only those requirements in
NERC cyber security Reliability Standards, but to develop a holistic cyber security policy
Page 29 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
appropriate for its organization. Elements of a policy that extend beyond the scope of NERC’s
cyber security Reliability Standards will not be considered candidates for potential violations
although they will help demonstrate the organization’s internal culture of compliance and
posture towards cyber security.
For Part 1.1, the Responsible Entity may consider the following for each of the required topics
in its one or more cyber security policies for medium and high impact BES Cyber Systems, if any:
1.1.1 Personnel and training (CIP-004)
• Organization position on acceptable background investigations
• Identification of possible disciplinary action for violating this policy
• Account management
1.1.2 Electronic Security Perimeters (CIP-005) including Interactive Remote Access
• Organization stance on use of wireless networks
• Identification of acceptable authentication methods
• Identification of trusted and untrusted resources
• Monitoring and logging of ingress and egress at Electronic Access Points
• Maintaining up-to-date anti-malware software before initiating Interactive Remote
Access
• Maintaining up-to-date patch levels for operating systems and applications used to
initiate Interactive Remote Access
• Disabling VPN “split-tunneling” or “dual-homed” workstations before initiating
Interactive Remote Access
• For vendors, contractors, or consultants: include language in contracts that requires
adherence to the Responsible Entity’s Interactive Remote Access controls
1.1.3 Physical security of BES Cyber Systems (CIP-006)
• Strategy for protecting Cyber Assets from unauthorized physical access
• Acceptable physical access control methods
• Monitoring and logging of physical ingress
1.1.4 System security management (CIP-007)
• Strategies for system hardening
• Acceptable methods of authentication and access control
• Password policies including length, complexity, enforcement, prevention of brute
force attempts
• Monitoring and logging of BES Cyber Systems
Page 30 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
1.1.5 Incident reporting and response planning (CIP-008)
• Recognition of Cyber Security Incidents
• Appropriate notifications upon discovery of an incident
• Obligations to report Cyber Security Incidents
1.1.6 Recovery plans for BES Cyber Systems (CIP-009)
• Availability of spare components
• Availability of system backups
1.1.7 Configuration change management and vulnerability assessments (CIP-010)
• Initiation of change requests
• Approval of changes
• Break-fix processes
1.1.8 Information protection (CIP-011)
• Information access control methods
• Notification of unauthorized information disclosure
• Information access on a need-to-know basis
1.1.9 Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances
• Processes to invoke special procedures in the event of a CIP Exceptional
Circumstance
• Processes to allow for exceptions to policy that do not violate CIP requirements
For Part 1.2, the Responsible Entity may consider the following for each of the required topics
in its one or more cyber security policies for assets containing low impact BES Cyber Systems, if
any:
1.2.1 Cyber security awareness
• Method(s) for delivery of security awareness
• Identification of groups to receive cyber security awareness
1.2.2 Physical security controls
• Acceptable approach(es) for selection of physical security control(s)
1.2.3 Electronic access controls
• Acceptable approach(es) for selection of electronic access control(s)
1.2.4 Cyber Security Incident response
• Recognition of Cyber Security Incidents
Page 31 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
• Appropriate notifications upon discovery of an incident
• Obligations to report Cyber Security Incidents
1.2.5 Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation
• Acceptable use of Transient Cyber Asset(s) and Removable Media
• Method(s) to mitigate the risk of the introduction of malicious code to low impact
BES Cyber Systems from Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media
• Method(s) to request Transient Cyber Asset and Removable Media
1.2.6 Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances
• Process(es) to declare a CIP Exceptional Circumstance
• Process(es) to respond to a declared CIP Exceptional Circumstance
Requirements relating to exceptions to a Responsible Entity’s security policies were removed
because it is a general management issue that is not within the scope of a reliability
requirement. It is an internal policy requirement and not a reliability requirement. However,
Responsible Entities are encouraged to continue this practice as a component of their cyber
security policies.
In this and all subsequent required approvals in the NERC CIP Reliability Standards, the
Responsible Entity may elect to use hardcopy or electronic approvals to the extent that there is
sufficient evidence to ensure the authenticity of the approving party.
Requirement R2:
The intent of Requirement R2 is for each Responsible Entity to create, document, and
implement one or more cyber security plan(s) that address the security objective for the
protection of low impact BES Cyber Systems. The required protections are designed to be part
of a program that covers the low impact BES Cyber Systems collectively at an asset level (based
on the list of assets containing low impact BES Cyber Systems identified in CIP-002), but not at
an individual device or system level.
Page 32 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Requirement R2, Attachment 1
As noted, Attachment 1 contains the sections that must be included in the cyber security
plan(s). The intent is to allow entities that have a combination of high, medium, and low impact
BES Cyber Systems the flexibility to choose, if desired, to cover their low impact BES Cyber
Systems (or any subset) under their programs used for the high or medium impact BES Cyber
Systems rather than maintain two separate programs. The purpose of the cyber security plan(s)
in Requirement R2 is for Responsible Entities to use the cyber security plan(s) as a means of
documenting their approaches to meeting the subject matter areas. The cyber security plan(s)
can be used to reference other policies and procedures that demonstrate “how” the
Responsible Entity is meeting each of the subject matter areas, or Responsible Entities can
develop comprehensive cyber security plan(s) that contain all of the detailed implementation
content solely within the cyber security plan itself. To meet the obligation for the cyber security
plan, the expectation is that the cyber security plan contains or references sufficient details to
address the implementation of each of the required subject matters areas.
Guidance for each of the subject matter areas of Attachment 1 is provided below.
Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section 1 – Cyber Security Awareness
The intent of the cyber security awareness program is for entities to reinforce good cyber
security practices with their personnel at least once every 15 calendar months. The entity has
the discretion to determine the topics to be addressed and the manner in which it will
communicate these topics. As evidence of compliance, the Responsible Entity should be able to
produce the awareness material that was delivered according to the delivery method(s) (e.g.,
posters, emails, or topics at staff meetings, etc.). The standard drafting team does not intend
for Responsible Entities to be required to maintain lists of recipients and track the reception of
the awareness material by personnel.
Although the focus of the awareness is cyber security, it does not mean that only technology-
related topics can be included in the program. Appropriate physical security topics (e.g.,
tailgating awareness and protection of badges for physical security, or “If you see something,
say something” campaigns, etc.) are valid for cyber security awareness. The intent is to cover
topics concerning any aspect of the protection of BES Cyber Systems.
Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section 2 – Physical Security Controls
The Responsible Entity must document and implement methods to control physical access to
(1) the asset or the locations of low impact BES Cyber Systems within the asset, and (2) Cyber
Assets that implement the electronic access control(s) specified by the Responsible Entity in
Attachment 1, Section 3.1, if any. If these Cyber Assets implementing the electronic access
controls are located within the same asset as the low impact BES Cyber Asset(s) and inherit the
same physical access controls and the same need as outlined in Section 2, this may be noted by
the Responsible Entity in either its policies or cyber security plan(s) to avoid duplicate
documentation of the same controls.
The Responsible Entity has the flexibility to select the methods used to meet the objective of
controlling physical access to (1) the asset(s) containing low impact BES Cyber System(s) or the
low impact BES Cyber Systems themselves and (2) the electronic access control Cyber Assets
specified by the Responsible Entity, if any. The Responsible Entity may use one or a
Page 33 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
combination of physical access controls, monitoring controls, or other operational, procedural,
or technical physical security controls. Entities may use perimeter controls (e.g., fences with
locked gates, guards, or site access policies, etc.) or more granular areas of physical access
control in areas where low impact BES Cyber Systems are located, such as control rooms or
control houses.
The security objective is to control the physical access based on need as determined by the
Responsible Entity. The need for physical access can be documented at the policy level. The
standard drafting team did not intend to obligate an entity to specify a need for each physical
access or authorization of an individual for physical access.
Monitoring as a physical security control can be used as a complement or an alternative to
physical access control. Examples of monitoring controls include, but are not limited to: (1)
alarm systems to detect motion or entry into a controlled area, or (2) human observation of a
controlled area. Monitoring does not necessarily require logging and maintaining logs but could
include monitoring that physical access has occurred or been attempted (e.g., door alarm, or
human observation, etc.). The standard drafting team’s intent is that the monitoring does not
need to be per low impact BES Cyber System but should be at the appropriate level to meet the
security objective of controlling physical access.
User authorization programs and lists of authorized users for physical access are not required
although they are an option to meet the security objective.
Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section 3 – Electronic Access Controls
Section 3 requires the establishment of electronic access controls for assets containing low
impact BES Cyber Systems when there is routable protocol communication or Dial-up
Connectivity between Cyber Asset(s) outside of the asset containing the low impact BES Cyber
System(s) and the low impact BES Cyber System(s) within such asset. The establishment of
electronic access controls is intended to reduce the risks associated with uncontrolled
communication using routable protocols or Dial-up Connectivity.
When implementing Attachment 1, Section 3.1, Responsible Entities should note that electronic
access controls to permit only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access are required
for communications when those communications meet all three of the criteria identified in
Attachment 1, Section 3.1. The Responsible Entity should evaluate the communications and
when all three criteria are met, the Responsible Entity must document and implement
electronic access control(s).
When identifying electronic access controls, Responsible Entities are provided flexibility in the
selection of the electronic access controls that meet their operational needs while meeting the
security objective of allowing only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access to low
impact BES Cyber Systems that use routable protocols between a low impact BES Cyber
System(s) and Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset.
In essence, the intent is for Responsible Entities to determine whether there is communication
between a low impact BES Cyber System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset containing
low impact BES Cyber System(s) that uses a routable protocol when entering or leaving the
asset or Dial-up Connectivity to the low impact BES Cyber System(s). Where such
Page 34 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
communication is present, Responsible Entities should document and implement electronic
access control(s). Where routable protocol communication for time-sensitive protection or
control functions between intelligent electronic devices that meets the exclusion language is
present, Responsible Entities should document that communication, but are not required to
establish any specific electronic access controls.
The inputs to this requirement are the assets identified in CIP-002 as containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s); therefore, the determination of routable protocol communications or Dial-up
Connectivity is an attribute of the asset. However, it is not intended for communication that
provides no access to or from the low impact BES Cyber System(s), but happens to be located at
the asset with the low impact BES Cyber System(s), to be evaluated for electronic access
controls.
Electronic Access Control Exclusion
In order to avoid future technology issues, the obligations for electronic access controls exclude
communications between intelligent electronic devices that use routable communication
protocols for time-sensitive protection or control functions, such as IEC TR-61850-90-5 R-
GOOSE messaging. Time-sensitive in this context generally means functions that would be
negatively impacted by the latency introduced in the communications by the required
electronic access controls. This time-sensitivity exclusion does not apply to SCADA
communications which typically operate on scan rates of 2 seconds or greater. While
technically time-sensitive, SCADA communications over routable protocols can withstand the
delay introduced by electronic access controls. Examples of excluded time-sensitive
communications are those communications which may necessitate the tripping of a breaker
within a few cycles. A Responsible Entity using this technology is not expected to implement the
electronic access controls noted herein. This exception was included so as not to inhibit the
functionality of the time-sensitive characteristics related to this technology and not to preclude
the use of such time-sensitive reliability enhancing functions if they use a routable protocol in
the future.
Considerations for Determining Routable Protocol Communications
To determine whether electronic access controls need to be implemented, the Responsible
Entity has to determine whether there is communication between a low impact BES Cyber
System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset containing the low impact BES Cyber System(s)
that uses a routable protocol when entering or leaving the asset.
When determining whether a routable protocol is entering or leaving the asset containing the
low impact BES Cyber System(s), Responsible Entities have flexibility in identifying an approach.
One approach is for Responsible Entities to identify an “electronic boundary” associated with
the asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s). This is not an Electronic Security
Perimeter per se, but a demarcation that demonstrates the routable protocol communication
entering or leaving the asset between a low impact BES Cyber System and Cyber Asset(s)
outside the asset to then have electronic access controls implemented. This electronic
boundary may vary by asset type (Control Center, substation, generation resource) and the
specific configuration of the asset. If this approach is used, the intent is for the Responsible
Entity to define the electronic boundary such that the low impact BES Cyber System(s) located
Page 35 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
at the asset are contained within the “electronic boundary.” This is strictly for determining
which routable protocol communications and networks are internal or inside or local to the
asset and which are external to or outside the asset.
Alternatively, the Responsible Entity may find the concepts of what is inside and outside to be
intuitively obvious for a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset containing low impact BES Cyber
System(s) communicating to a low impact BES Cyber System(s) inside the asset. This may be the
case when a low impact BES Cyber System(s) is communicating with a Cyber Asset many miles
away and a clear and unambiguous demarcation exists. In this case, a Responsible Entity may
decide not to identify an “electronic boundary,” but rather to simply leverage the unambiguous
asset demarcation to ensure that the electronic access controls are placed between the low
impact BES Cyber System(s) and the Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset.
Determining Electronic Access Controls
Once a Responsible Entity has determined that there is routable communication between a low
impact BES Cyber System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset containing the low impact
BES Cyber System(s) that uses a routable protocol when entering or leaving the asset containing
the low impact BES Cyber System(s), the intent is for the Responsible Entity to document and
implement its chosen electronic access control(s). The control(s) are intended to allow only
“necessary” inbound and outbound electronic access as determined by the Responsible Entity.
However the Responsible Entity chooses to document the inbound and outbound access
permissions and the need, the intent is that the Responsible Entity is able to explain the
reasons for the electronic access permitted. The reasoning for “necessary” inbound and
outbound electronic access controls may be documented within the Responsible Entity’s cyber
security plan(s), within a comment on an access control list, a database, spreadsheet or other
policies or procedures associated with the electronic access controls.
Concept Diagrams
The diagrams on the following pages are provided as examples to illustrate various electronic
access controls at a conceptual level. Regardless of the concepts or configurations chosen by
the Responsible Entity, the intent is to achieve the security objective of permitting only
necessary inbound and outbound electronic access for communication between low impact BES
Cyber Systems and Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset containing the low impact BES Cyber
System(s) using a routable protocol when entering or leaving the asset.
NOTE:
• This is not an exhaustive list of applicable concepts.
• The same legend is used in each diagram; however, the diagram may not contain all of the
articles represented in the legend.
Page 36 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 1 – Host-based Inbound & Outbound Access Permissions
The Responsible Entity may choose to utilize a host-based firewall technology on the low
impact BES Cyber System(s) itself that manages the inbound and outbound electronic access
permissions so that only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access is allowed between
the low impact BES Cyber System(s) and the Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset containing the low
impact BES Cyber System(s). When permitting the inbound and outbound electronic access
permissions using access control lists, the Responsible Entity could restrict communication(s)
using source and destination addresses or ranges of addresses. Responsible Entities could also
restrict communication(s) using ports or services based on the capability of the electronic
access control, the low impact BES Cyber System(s), or the application(s).
Routable Routable communications
Protocol entering or leaving the asset
containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s)
Low impact
BES Cyber
System
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s)
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 1
Page 37 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 2 – Network-based Inbound & Outbound Access Permissions
The Responsible Entity may choose to use a security device that permits only necessary
inbound and outbound electronic access to the low impact BES Cyber System(s) within the
asset containing the low impact BES Cyber System(s). In this example, two low impact BES
Cyber Systems are accessed using the routable protocol that is entering or leaving the asset
containing the low impact BES Cyber System(s). The IP/Serial converter is continuing the same
communications session from the Cyber Asset(s) that are outside the asset to the low impact
BES Cyber System(s). The security device provides the electronic access controls to permit only
necessary inbound and outbound routable protocol access to the low impact BES Cyber
System(s). When permitting the inbound and outbound electronic access permissions using
access control lists, the Responsible Entity could restrict communication(s) using source and
destination addresses or ranges of addresses. Responsible Entities could also restrict
communication(s) using ports or services based on the capability of the electronic access
control, the low impact BES Cyber System(s), or the application(s).
Routable communications
entering or leaving the asset
containing low impact BES
Routable
Cyber System(s)
Protocol
Cyber Asset(s) providing electronic access controls
Network
Low impact
BES Cyber
System
Serial
Non-routable
IP/Serial
Protocol
Converter
Low impact
BES Cyber
System
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s)
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 2
Page 38 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 3 – Centralized Network-based Inbound & Outbound Access
Permissions
The Responsible Entity may choose to utilize a security device at a centralized location that may
or may not be at another asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s). The electronic
access control(s) do not necessarily have to reside inside the asset containing the low impact
BES Cyber System(s). A security device is in place at “Location X” to act as the electronic access
control and permit only necessary inbound and outbound routable protocol access between
the low impact BES Cyber System(s) and the Cyber Asset(s) outside each asset containing low
impact BES Cyber System(s). Care should be taken that electronic access to or between each
asset is through the Cyber Asset(s) determined by the Responsible Entity to be performing
electronic access controls at the centralized location. When permitting the inbound and
outbound electronic access permissions using access control lists, the Responsible Entity could
restrict communication(s) using source and destination addresses or ranges of addresses.
Responsible Entities could also restrict communication(s) using ports or services based on the
capability of the electronic access control, the low impact BES Cyber System(s), or the
application(s).
Firewall, Router Access Control List,
Gateway or Other Security Device
(Cyber Asset(s) performing electronic
access controls)
Location X
Routable
Protocol
Routable communications Routable communications
entering or leaving the asset entering or leaving the asset
containing low impact BES containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s) Cyber System(s)
Routable
Routable
Protocol
Protocol
`
Network Network
Low impact Low impact
BES Cyber BES Cyber
Non BES Cyber Non BES Cyber
System System
Systsem System
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s) Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s)
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 3
Page 39 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 4 – Uni-directional Gateway
The Responsible Entity may choose to utilize a uni-directional gateway as the electronic access
control. The low impact BES Cyber System(s) is not accessible (data cannot flow into the low
impact BES Cyber System) using the routable protocol entering the asset due to the
implementation of a “one-way” (uni-directional) path for data to flow. The uni-directional
gateway is configured to permit only the necessary outbound communications using the
routable protocol communication leaving the asset.
Routable communications
entering or leaving the asset
Routable
containing low impact BES
Protocol
Cyber System(s)
Uni-directional
Gateway
(Cyber Asset(s) performing
electronic access controls
Low impact
BES Cyber
System
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s)
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 4
Page 40 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 5 – User Authentication
This reference model demonstrates that Responsible Entities have flexibility in choosing
electronic access controls so long as the security objective of the requirement is met. The
Responsible Entity may choose to utilize a non-BES Cyber Asset located at the asset containing
the low impact BES Cyber System that requires authentication for communication from the
Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset. This non-BES Cyber System performing the authentication
permits only authenticated communication to connect to the low impact BES Cyber System(s),
meeting the first half of the security objective to permit only necessary inbound electronic
access. Additionally, the non-BES Cyber System performing authentication is configured such
that it permits only necessary outbound communication meeting the second half of the security
objective. Often, the outbound communications would be controlled in this network
architecture by permitting no communication to be initiated from the low impact BES Cyber
System. This configuration may be beneficial when the only communication to a device is for
user-initiated interactive access.
Routable
Protocol Routable communications
entering or leaving the asset
containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s)
Non-BES Cyber System
(Cyber Asset(s)
performing electronic
access controls)
Serial
Non-routable
Protocol
Low impact
BES Cyber
System
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s)
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 5
Page 41 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 6 – Indirect Access
In implementing its electronic access controls, the Responsible Entity may identify that it has
indirect access between the low impact BES Cyber System and a Cyber Asset outside the asset
containing the low impact BES Cyber System through a non-BES Cyber Asset located within the
asset. This indirect access meets the criteria of having communication between the low impact
BES Cyber System and a Cyber Asset outside the asset containing the low impact BES Cyber
System. In this reference model, it is intended that the Responsible Entity implement electronic
access controls that permit only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access to the low
impact BES Cyber System. Consistent with the other reference models provided, the electronic
access in this reference model is controlled using the security device that is restricting the
communication that is entering or leaving the asset.
Routable communications
entering or leaving the asset
containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s)
Routable
Protocol
DMZ
Firewall, Router Access Control List,
Gateway or Other Security Device
(Cyber Asset(s) performing electronic
access controls)
Network
Non-BES Cyber Asset
Low impact
BES Cyber
System
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s)
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 6
Page 42 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 7 – Electronic Access Controls at assets containing low impact BES
Cyber Systems and ERC
In this reference model, there is both a routable protocol entering and leaving the asset
containing the low impact BES Cyber System(s) that is used by Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset
and External Routable Connectivity because there is at least one medium impact BES Cyber
System and one low impact BES Cyber System within the asset using the routable protocol
communications. The Responsible Entity may choose to leverage an interface on the medium
impact Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) to provide electronic access
controls for purposes of CIP-003. The EACMS is therefore performing multiple functions – as a
medium impact EACMS and as implementing electronic access controls for an asset containing
low impact BES Cyber Systems.
Routable communications
Routable
entering or leaving the asset
Protocol
containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s)
ERC
ESP
Network
EAP
Interface
Firewall, Router Access Control List,
Gateway or Other Security Device
(Cyber Asset(s) performing electronic Medium impact
access control) BES Cyber
System with ERC
Network
Low impact
Non-BES Cyber
BES Cyber
System
System
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s) and medium impact BES Cyber System(s)
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 7
Page 43 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 8 – Physical Isolation and Serial Non-routable Communications –
No Electronic Access Controls Required
In this reference model, the criteria from Attachment 1, Section 3.1 requiring the
implementation of electronic access controls are not met. This reference model demonstrates
three concepts:
1) The physical isolation of the low impact BES Cyber System(s) from the routable protocol
communication entering or leaving the asset containing the low impact BES Cyber
System(s), commonly referred to as an ‘air gap’, mitigates the need to implement the
required electronic access controls;
2) The communication to the low impact BES Cyber System from a Cyber Asset outside the
asset containing the low impact BES Cyber System(s) using only a serial non-routable
protocol where such communication is entering or leaving the asset mitigates the need
to implement the required electronic access controls.
3) The routable protocol communication between the low impact BES Cyber System(s) and
other Cyber Asset(s), such as the second low impact BES Cyber System depicted, may
exist without needing to implement the required electronic access controls so long as
the routable protocol communications never leaves the asset containing the low impact
BES Cyber System(s).
Page 44 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Serial Routable
Non-routable Protocol
Protocol
Non-BES Cyber Asset
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s) Non-BES Cyber Asset
Page 45 of 59
Air
Gap
No routable communication Routable communication
entering or leaving the asset entering or leaving the asset
containing low impact BES containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s) Cyber System(s), but no
communication between a
low impact BES Cyber System
and a Cyber Asset outside
the asset
Low impact
BES Cyber
System
Non-BES Cyber Asset
Low impact
BES Cyber
System
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 8
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 9 – Logical Isolation - No Electronic Access Controls Required
In this reference model, the criteria from Attachment 1, Section 3.1 requiring the
implementation of electronic access controls are not met. The Responsible Entity has logically
isolated the low impact BES Cyber System(s) from the routable protocol communication
entering or leaving the asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s). The logical network
segmentation in this reference model permits no communication between a low impact BES
Cyber System and a Cyber Asset outside the asset. Additionally, no indirect access exists
because those non-BES Cyber Assets that are able to communicate outside the asset are strictly
prohibited from communicating to the low impact BES Cyber System(s). The low impact BES
Cyber System(s) is on an isolated network segment with logical controls preventing routable
protocol communication into or out of the network containing the low impact BES Cyber
System(s) and these communications never leave the asset using a routable protocol.
Page 46 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Routable communication
entering or leaving the asset
No communication is containing low impact BES
permitted between the Cyber System(s), but no
control network segment Routable communication between a
and the non-control network Protocol low impact BES Cyber System
segment and a Cyber Asset outside
the asset
Network Device
with logical network segmentation
(Cyber Asset(s) providing electronic access controls)
Low impact
BES Cyber
Non-BES Cyber Asset
System
Low impact
BES Cyber
System Non-BES Cyber Asset
Control Network Segment Non-Control Network Segment
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s)
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 9
Page 47 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Reference Model 10 - Serial Non-routable Communications Traversing an Isolated
Channel on a Non-routable Transport Network – No Electronic Access Controls
Required
In this reference model, the criteria from Attachment 1, Section 3.1 requiring the
implementation of electronic access controls are not met. This reference model depicts
communication between a low impact BES Cyber System and a Cyber Asset outside the asset
containing the low impact BES Cyber System over a serial non-routable protocol which is
transported across a wide-area network using a protocol independent transport that may carry
routable and non-routable communication such as a Time-Division Multiplexing (TDM) network,
a Synchronous Optical Network (SONET), or a Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) network.
While there is routable protocol communication entering or leaving the asset containing low
impact BES Cyber Systems(s) and there is communication between a low impact BES Cyber
System and a Cyber Asset outside the asset, the communication between the low impact BES
Cyber System and the Cyber Asset outside the asset is not using the routable protocol
communication. This model is related to Reference Model 9 in that it relies on logical isolation
to prohibit the communication between a low impact BES Cyber System and a Cyber Asset
outside the asset from using a routable protocol.
Page 48 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Serial
Routable
Non-routable
Protocol
Protocol
Channel Routable communication
Channel
entering or leaving the asset
containing low impact BES
Protocol
No communication is Cyber System(s)
Independent
permitted between the serial
Transport
non-routable protocol
network and the routable
protocol network
ACFATIIVLE ACFATIIVLE ACFATIIVLE ACFATIIVLE
CPU SERIAL DC-3 D(SCM-3)4
ETHERNET 12 TXLOS LOS
CONSOLE 34 TX
KELOYAD 56 TXLOS
Laser hazard
Non-BES Cyber Asset
Network
Serial
Non-routable
Protocol
Low impact
BES Cyber
System
Non-BES Cyber Asset
Asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s)
Communication between a
Non-routable Protocol Routable Protocol low impact BES Cyber System and
a Cyber Asset outside the asset
Reference Model 10
Page 49 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Dial-up Connectivity
Dial-up Connectivity to a low impact BES Cyber System is set to dial out only (no auto-answer)
to a preprogrammed number to deliver data. Incoming Dial-up Connectivity is to a dialback
modem, a modem that must be remotely controlled by the control center or control room, has
some form of access control, or the low impact BES Cyber System has access control.
Insufficient Access Controls
Some examples of situations that would lack sufficient access controls to meet the intent of this
requirement include:
• An asset has Dial-up Connectivity and a low impact BES Cyber System is reachable via an
auto-answer modem that connects any caller to the Cyber Asset that has a default
password. There is no practical access control in this instance.
• A low impact BES Cyber System has a wireless card on a public carrier that allows the
BES Cyber System to be reachable via a public IP address. In essence, low impact BES
Cyber Systems should not be accessible from the Internet and search engines such as
Shodan.
• Dual-homing or multiple-network interface cards without disabling IP forwarding in the
non-BES Cyber Asset within the DMZ to provide separation between the low impact BES
Cyber System(s) and the external network would not meet the intent of “controlling”
inbound and outbound electronic access assuming there was no other host-based
firewall or other security devices on the non-BES Cyber Asset.
Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section 4 – Cyber Security Incident Response
The entity should have one or more documented Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) that
include each of the topics listed in Section 4. If, in the normal course of business, suspicious
activities are noted at an asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s), the intent is for the
entity to implement a Cyber Security Incident response plan that will guide the entity in
responding to the incident and reporting the incident if it rises to the level of a Reportable
Cyber Security Incident.
Entities are provided the flexibility to develop their Attachment 1, Section 4 Cyber Security
Incident response plan(s) by asset or group of assets. The plans do not need to be on a per
asset site or per low impact BES Cyber System basis. Entities can choose to use a single
enterprise-wide plan to fulfill the obligations for low impact BES Cyber Systems.
The plan(s) must be tested once every 36 months. This is not an exercise per low impact BES
Cyber Asset or per type of BES Cyber Asset but rather is an exercise of each incident response
plan the entity created to meet this requirement. An actual Reportable Cyber Security Incident
counts as an exercise as do other forms of tabletop exercises or drills. NERC-led exercises such
as GridEx participation would also count as an exercise provided the entity’s response plan is
followed. The intent of the requirement is for entities to keep the Cyber Security Incident
response plan(s) current, which includes updating the plan(s), if needed, within 180 days
following a test or an actual incident.
For low impact BES Cyber Systems, the only portion of the definition of Cyber Security Incident
that would apply is‚ “A malicious act or suspicious event that disrupts, or was an attempt to
Page 50 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
disrupt, the operation of a BES Cyber System.” The other portion of that definition is not to be
used to require ESPs and PSPs for low impact BES Cyber Systems.
Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section 5 – Transient Cyber Assets and Removable
Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation
Most BES Cyber Assets and BES Cyber Systems are isolated from external public or untrusted
networks, and therefore Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media are needed to transport
files to and from secure areas to maintain, monitor, or troubleshoot critical systems. Transient
Cyber Assets and Removable Media are a potential means for cyber-attack. To protect the BES
Cyber Assets and BES Cyber Systems, CIP-003 Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section 5
requires Responsible Entities to document and implement a plan for how they will mitigate the
risk of malicious code introduction to low impact BES Cyber Systems from Transient Cyber
Assets and Removable Media. The approach of defining a plan allows the Responsible Entity to
document processes that are supportable within its organization and in alignment with its
change management processes.
Transient Cyber Assets can be one of many types of devices from a specially-designed device for
maintaining equipment in support of the BES to a platform such as a laptop, desktop, or tablet
that may interface with or run applications that support BES Cyber Systems and is capable of
transmitting executable code to the BES Cyber Asset(s) or BES Cyber System(s). Note: Cyber
Assets connected to a BES Cyber System for less than 30 days due to an unplanned removal,
such as premature failure, are not intended to be identified as Transient Cyber Assets.
Removable Media subject to this requirement include, among others, floppy disks, compact
disks, USB flash drives, external hard drives, and other flash memory cards/drives that contain
nonvolatile memory.
Examples of these temporarily connected devices include, but are not limited to:
• Diagnostic test equipment;
• Equipment used for BES Cyber System maintenance; or
• Equipment used for BES Cyber System configuration.
To meet the objective of mitigating risks associated with the introduction of malicious code at
low impact BES Cyber Systems, Section 5 specifies the capabilities and possible security
methods available to Responsible Entities based upon asset type and ownership.
With the list of options provided in Attachment 1, the entity has the discretion to use the
option(s) that is most appropriate. This includes documenting its approach for how and when
the entity reviews the Transient Cyber Asset under its control or under the control of parties
other than the Responsible Entity. The entity should avoid implementing a security function
that jeopardizes reliability by taking actions that would negatively impact the performance or
support of the Transient Cyber Asset or BES Cyber Asset.
Page 51 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Malicious Code Risk Mitigation
The terms “mitigate”, “mitigating”, and “mitigation” are used in Section 5 in Attachment 1 to
address the risks posed by malicious code when connecting Transient Cyber Assets and
Removable Media to BES Cyber Systems. Mitigation is intended to mean that entities reduce
security risks presented by connecting the Transient Cyber Asset or Removable Media. When
determining the method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code, it is not intended for
entities to perform and document a formal risk assessment associated with the introduction of
malicious code.
Per Transient Cyber Asset Capability
As with other CIP standards, the requirements are intended for an entity to use the method(s)
that the system is capable of performing. The use of “per Transient Cyber Asset capability” is to
eliminate the need for a Technical Feasibility Exception when it is understood that the device
cannot use a method(s). For example, for malicious code, many types of appliances are not
capable of implementing antivirus software; therefore, because it is not a capability of those
types of devices, implementation of the antivirus software would not be required for those
devices.
Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section 5.1 - Transient Cyber Asset(s) Managed by
the Responsible Entity
For Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media that are connected to both low impact and
medium/high impact BES Cyber Systems, entities must be aware of the differing levels of
requirements and manage these assets under the program that matches the highest impact
level to which they will connect.
Section 5.1: Entities are to document and implement their plan(s) to mitigate malicious code
through the use of one or more of the protective measures listed, based on the capability of the
Transient Cyber Asset.
The Responsible Entity has the flexibility to apply the selected method(s) to meet the objective
of mitigating the introductions of malicious code either in an on-going or in an on-demand
manner. An example of managing a device in an on-going manner is having the antivirus
solution for the device managed as part of an end-point security solution with current signature
or pattern updates, regularly scheduled systems scans, etc. In contrast, for devices that are
used infrequently and the signatures or patterns are not kept current, the entity may manage
those devices in an on-demand manner by requiring an update to the signatures or patterns
and a scan of the device before the device is connected to ensure that it is free of malicious
code.
Selecting management in an on-going or on-demand manner is not intended to imply that the
control has to be verified at every single connection. For example, if the device is managed in
an on-demand manner, but will be used to perform maintenance on several BES Cyber Asset(s),
the Responsible Entity may choose to document that the Transient Cyber Asset has been
updated before being connected as a Transient Cyber Asset for the first use of that
maintenance work. The intent is not to require a log documenting each connection of a
Transient Cyber Asset to a BES Cyber Asset.
Page 52 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
The following is additional discussion of the methods to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code.
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures or patterns,
provides flexibility to manage Transient Cyber Asset(s) by deploying antivirus or
endpoint security tools that maintain a scheduled update of the signatures or patterns.
Also, for devices that do not regularly connect to receive scheduled updates, entities
may choose to update the signatures or patterns and scan the Transient Cyber Asset
prior to connection to ensure no malicious software is present.
• Application whitelisting is a method of authorizing only the applications and processes
that are necessary on the Transient Cyber Asset. This reduces the risk that malicious
software could execute on the Transient Cyber Asset and impact the BES Cyber Asset or
BES Cyber System.
• When using methods other than those listed, entities need to document how the other
method(s) meet the objective of mitigating the risk of the introduction of malicious
code.
If malicious code is discovered on the Transient Cyber Asset, it must be mitigated prior to
connection to a BES Cyber System to prevent the malicious code from being introduced into the
BES Cyber System. An entity may choose to not connect the Transient Cyber Asset to a BES
Cyber System to prevent the malicious code from being introduced into the BES Cyber System.
Entities should also consider whether the detected malicious code is a Cyber Security Incident.
Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section 5.2 - Transient Cyber Asset(s) Managed by a
Party Other than the Responsible Entity
Section 5 also recognizes the lack of direct control over Transient Cyber Assets that are
managed by parties other than the Responsible Entity. This lack of control, however, does not
obviate the Responsible Entity’s responsibility to ensure that methods have been deployed to
mitigate the introduction of malicious code to low impact BES Cyber System(s) from Transient
Cyber Assets it does not manage. Section 5 requires entities to review the other party’s security
practices with respect to Transient Cyber Assets to help meet the objective of the requirement.
The use of “prior to connecting the Transient Cyber Assets” is intended to ensure that the
Responsible Entity conducts the review before the first connection of the Transient Cyber Asset
to help meet the objective to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. The SDT does not
intend for the Responsible Entity to conduct a review for every single connection of that
Transient Cyber Asset once the Responsible Entity has established the Transient Cyber Asset is
meeting the security objective. The intent is to not require a log documenting each connection
of a Transient Cyber Asset to a BES Cyber Asset.
To facilitate these controls, Responsible Entities may execute agreements with other parties to
provide support services to BES Cyber Systems and BES Cyber Assets that may involve the use
of Transient Cyber Assets. Entities may consider using the Department of Energy Cybersecurity
Procurement Language for Energy Delivery dated April 2014.1 Procurement language may unify
1 http://www.energy.gov/oe/downloads/cybersecurity-procurement-language-energy-delivery-april-2014
Page 53 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
the other party and entity actions supporting the BES Cyber Systems and BES Cyber Assets. CIP
program attributes may be considered including roles and responsibilities, access controls,
monitoring, logging, vulnerability, and patch management along with incident response and
back up recovery may be part of the other party’s support. Entities may consider the “General
Cybersecurity Procurement Language” and “The Supplier’s Life Cycle Security Program” when
drafting Master Service Agreements, Contracts, and the CIP program processes and controls.
Section 5.2.1: Entities are to document and implement their process(es) to mitigate the
introduction of malicious code through the use of one or more of the protective measures
listed.
• Review the use of antivirus software and signature or pattern levels to ensure that the
level is adequate to the Responsible Entity to mitigate the risk of malicious software
being introduced to an applicable system.
• Review the antivirus or endpoint security processes of the other party to ensure that
their processes are adequate to the Responsible Entity to mitigate the risk of
introducing malicious software to an applicable system.
• Review the use of application whitelisting used by the other party to mitigate the risk of
introducing malicious software to an applicable system.
• Review the use of live operating systems or software executable only from read-only
media to ensure that the media is free from malicious software itself. Entities should
review the processes to build the read-only media as well as the media itself.
• Review system hardening practices used by the other party to ensure that unnecessary
ports, services, applications, etc. have been disabled or removed. This method intends
to reduce the attack surface on the Transient Cyber Asset and reduce the avenues by
which malicious software could be introduced.
Section 5.2.2: The intent of this section is to ensure that after conducting the selected review
from Section 5.2.1, if there are deficiencies identified, actions mitigating the risk of the
introduction of malicious code to low impact BES Cyber Systems must be completed prior to
connecting the device(s) to an applicable system.
Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section 5.3 - Removable Media
Entities have a high level of control for Removable Media that are going to be connected to
their BES Cyber Assets.
Section 5.3: Entities are to document and implement their process(es) to mitigate the
introduction of malicious code through the use of one or more method(s) to detect malicious
code on the Removable Media before it is connected to a BES Cyber Asset. When using the
method(s) to detect malicious code, it is expected to occur from a system that is not part of the
BES Cyber System to reduce the risk of propagating malicious code into the BES Cyber System
Page 54 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
network or onto one of the BES Cyber Assets. If malicious code is discovered, it must be
removed or mitigated to prevent it from being introduced into the BES Cyber Asset or BES
Cyber System. Entities should also consider whether the detected malicious code is a Cyber
Security Incident. Frequency and timing of the methods used to detect malicious code were
intentionally excluded from the requirement because there are multiple timing scenarios that
can be incorporated into a plan to mitigate the risk of malicious code. The SDT does not intend
to obligate a Responsible Entity to conduct a review for every single connection of Removable
Media, but rather to implement its plan(s) in a manner that protects all BES Cyber Systems
where Removable Media may be used. The intent is to not require a log documenting each
connection of Removable Media to a BES Cyber Asset.
As a method to detect malicious code, entities may choose to use Removable Media with on-
board malicious code detection tools. For these tools, the Removable Media are still used in
conjunction with a Cyber Asset to perform the detection. For Section 5.3.1, the Cyber Asset
used to perform the malicious code detection must be outside of the BES Cyber System.
Requirement R3:
The intent of CIP-003-8, Requirement R3 is effectively unchanged since prior versions of the
standard. The specific description of the CIP Senior Manager has now been included as a
defined term rather than clarified in the Reliability Standard itself to prevent any unnecessary
cross-reference to this standard. It is expected that the CIP Senior Manager will play a key role
in ensuring proper strategic planning, executive/board-level awareness, and overall program
governance.
Requirement R4:
As indicated in the rationale for CIP-003-8, Requirement R4, this requirement is intended to
demonstrate a clear line of authority and ownership for security matters. The intent of the SDT
was not to impose any particular organizational structure, but, rather, the intent is to afford the
Responsible Entity significant flexibility to adapt this requirement to its existing organizational
structure. A Responsible Entity may satisfy this requirement through a single delegation
document or through multiple delegation documents. The Responsible Entity can make use of
the delegation of the delegation authority itself to increase the flexibility in how this applies to
its organization. In such a case, delegations may exist in numerous documentation records as
long as the collection of these documentation records shows a clear line of authority back to
the CIP Senior Manager. In addition, the CIP Senior Manager could also choose not to delegate
any authority and meet this requirement without such delegation documentation.
The Responsible Entity must keep its documentation of the CIP Senior Manager and any
delegations up-to-date. This is to ensure that individuals do not assume any undocumented
authority. However, delegations do not have to be re-instated if the individual who delegated
the task changes roles or the individual is replaced. For instance, assume that John Doe is
named the CIP Senior Manager and he delegates a specific task to the Substation Maintenance
Manager. If John Doe is replaced as the CIP Senior Manager, the CIP Senior Manager
documentation must be updated within the specified timeframe, but the existing delegation to
Page 55 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
the Substation Maintenance Manager remains in effect as approved by the previous CIP Senior
Manager, John Doe.
Page 56 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
Rationale:
During development of this standard, text boxes were embedded within the standard to explain
the rationale for various parts of the standard. Upon BOT approval, the text from the rationale
text boxes was moved to this section.
Rationale for Requirement R1:
One or more security policies enable effective implementation of the requirements of the cyber
security Reliability Standards. The purpose of policies is to provide a management and
governance foundation for all requirements that apply to a Responsible Entity’s BES Cyber
Systems. The Responsible Entity can demonstrate through its policies that its management
supports the accountability and responsibility necessary for effective implementation of the
requirements.
Annual review and approval of the cyber security policies ensures that the policies are kept-up-
to-date and periodically reaffirms management’s commitment to the protection of its BES
Cyber Systems.
Rationale for Requirement R2:
In response to FERC Order No. 791, Requirement R2 requires entities to develop and implement
cyber security plans to meet specific security control objectives for assets containing low impact
BES Cyber System(s). The cyber security plan(s) covers five subject matter areas: (1) cyber
security awareness; (2) physical security controls; (3) electronic access controls; (4) Cyber
Security Incident response; and (5) Transient Cyber Asset and Removable Media Malicious Code
Risk Mitigation. This plan(s), along with the cyber security policies required under Requirement
R1, Part 1.2, provides a framework for operational, procedural, and technical safeguards for low
impact BES Cyber Systems.
Considering the varied types of low impact BES Cyber Systems across the BES, Attachment 1
provides Responsible Entities flexibility on how to apply the security controls to meet the
security objectives. Additionally, because many Responsible Entities have multiple-impact rated
BES Cyber Systems, nothing in the requirement prohibits entities from using their high and
medium impact BES Cyber System policies, procedures, and processes to implement security
controls required for low impact BES Cyber Systems, as detailed in Requirement R2,
Attachment 1.
Responsible Entities will use their identified assets containing low impact BES Cyber System(s)
(developed pursuant to CIP-002) to substantiate the sites or locations associated with low
impact BES Cyber System(s). However, there is no requirement or compliance expectation for
Responsible Entities to maintain a list(s) of individual low impact BES Cyber System(s) and their
associated cyber assets or to maintain a list of authorized users.
Rationale for Modifications to Sections 2 and 3 of Attachment 1 (Requirement R2):
Requirement R2 mandates that entities develop and implement one or more cyber security
plan(s) to meet specific security objectives for assets containing low impact BES Cyber
System(s). In Paragraph 73 of FERC Order No. 822, the Commission directed NERC to modify
“…the Low Impact External Routable Connectivity definition to reflect the commentary in the
Guidelines and Technical Basis section of CIP-003-6…to provide needed clarity to the definition
Page 57 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
and eliminate ambiguity surrounding the term ‘direct’ as it is used in the proposed
definition…within one year of the effective date of this Final Rule.”
The revisions to Section 3 incorporate select language from the LERC definition into Attachment
1 and focus the requirement on implementing electronic access controls for asset(s) containing
low impact BES Cyber System(s). This change requires the Responsible Entity to permit only
necessary inbound and outbound electronic access when using a routable protocol entering or
leaving the asset between low impact BES Cyber System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the
asset containing low impact BES Cyber system(s). When this communication is present,
Responsible Entities are required to implement electronic access controls unless that
communication meets the following exclusion language (previously in the definition of LERC)
contained in romanette (iii): “not used for time-sensitive protection or control functions
between intelligent electronic devices (e.g. communications using protocol IEC TR-61850-90-5
R-GOOSE)”.
The revisions to Section 2 of Attachment 1 complement the revisions to Section 3;
consequently, the requirement now mandates the Responsible Entity control physical access to
“the Cyber Asset(s), as specified by the Responsible Entity, that provide electronic access
control(s) implemented for Section 3.1, if any.” The focus on electronic access controls rather
than on the Low Impact BES Cyber System Electronic Access Points (LEAPs) eliminates the need
for LEAPs.
Given these revisions to Sections 2 and 3, the NERC Glossary terms: Low Impact External
Routable Connectivity (LERC) and Low Impact BES Cyber System Electronic Access Point (LEAP)
will be retired.
Rationale for Section 5 of Attachment 1 (Requirement R2):
Requirement R2 mandates that entities develop and implement one or more cyber security
plan(s) to meet specific security objectives for assets containing low impact BES Cyber
System(s). In Paragraph 32 of FERC Order No. 822, the Commission directed NERC to “…provide
mandatory protection for transient devices used at Low Impact BES Cyber Systems based on
the risk posed to bulk electric system reliability.” Transient devices are potential vehicles for
introducing malicious code into low impact BES Cyber Systems. Section 5 of Attachment 1 is
intended to mitigate the risk of malware propagation to the BES through low impact BES Cyber
Systems by requiring entities to develop and implement one or more plan(s) to address the risk.
The cyber security plan(s) along with the cyber security policies required under Requirement
R1, Part 1.2, provide a framework for operational, procedural, and technical safeguards for low
impact BES Cyber Systems.
Rationale for Requirement R3:
The identification and documentation of the single CIP Senior Manager ensures that there is
clear authority and ownership for the CIP program within an organization, as called for in
Blackout Report Recommendation 43. The language that identifies CIP Senior Manager
responsibilities is included in the Glossary of Terms used in NERC Reliability Standards so that it
may be used across the body of CIP standards without an explicit cross-reference.
Page 58 of 59
CIP-003-8 Supplemental Material
FERC Order No. 706, Paragraph 296, requests consideration of whether the single senior
manager should be a corporate officer or equivalent. As implicated through the defined term,
the senior manager has “the overall authority and responsibility for leading and managing
implementation of the requirements within this set of standards” which ensures that the senior
manager is of sufficient position in the Responsible Entity to ensure that cyber security receives
the prominence that is necessary. In addition, given the range of business models for
responsible entities, from municipal, cooperative, federal agencies, investor owned utilities,
privately owned utilities, and everything in between, the SDT believes that requiring the CIP
Senior Manager to be a “corporate officer or equivalent” would be extremely difficult to
interpret and enforce on a consistent basis.
Rationale for Requirement R4:
The intent of the requirement is to ensure clear accountability within an organization for
certain security matters. It also ensures that delegations are kept up-to-date and that
individuals do not assume undocumented authority.
In FERC Order No. 706, Paragraphs 379 and 381, the Commission notes that Recommendation
43 of the 2003 Blackout Report calls for “clear lines of authority and ownership for security
matters.” With this in mind, the Standard Drafting Team has sought to provide clarity in the
requirement for delegations so that this line of authority is clear and apparent from the
documented delegations.
Page 59 of 59
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-003-8.pdf ---

