--- START DOCUMENT: cip-013-3.pdf ---
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
2. Number: CIP-013-3
3. Purpose: To mitigate cyber security risks to the reliable operation of the Bulk
Electric System (BES) by implementing security controls for supply chain risk
management of BES Cyber Systems (BCS).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in
Page 1 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset
of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-013-3:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESPs).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between Cyber Systems providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or
more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
Page 2 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
4.2.3.6. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the identification and categorization process
required by CIP-002 or any subsequent version of that Reliability
Standard.
5. Effective Date: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan”.
Page 3 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall develop one or more documented supply chain cyber
security risk management plan(s) for high and medium impact BCS and their
associated Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS), Physical Access
Control Systems (PACS), and Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI). The plan(s) shall include:
[Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. One or more process(es) used in planning for the procurement of applicable
systems listed in Requirement R1 to identify and assess cyber security risk(s) to
the BES from vendor products or services resulting from: (i) procuring and
installing vendor equipment and software; and (ii) transitions from one vendor(s)
to another vendor(s).
1.2. One or more process(es) used in procuring applicable systems listed in
Requirement R1 that address the following, as applicable:
1.2.1. Notification by the vendor of vendor-identified incidents related to the
products or services provided to the Responsible Entity that pose cyber
security risk to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.2. Coordination of responses to vendor-identified incidents related to the
products or services provided to the Responsible Entity that pose cyber
security risk to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.3. Notification by vendors when remote or onsite access should no longer
be granted to vendor representatives;
1.2.4. Disclosure by vendors of known vulnerabilities related to the products or
services provided to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.5. Verification of software integrity and authenticity of all software and
patches provided by the vendor; and
1.2.6. Coordination of controls for vendor-initiated remote access.
M1. Evidence shall include one or more documented supply chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) as specified in the Requirement.
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement its supply chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) specified in Requirement R1. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
Note: Implementation of the plan does not require the Responsible Entity to
renegotiate or abrogate existing contracts (including amendments to master
agreements and purchase orders). Additionally, the following issues are beyond the
scope of Requirement R2: (1) the actual terms and conditions of a procurement
contract; and (2) vendor performance and adherence to a contract.
M2. Evidence shall include documentation to demonstrate implementation of the supply
chain cyber security risk management plan(s), which could include, but is not limited
to, correspondence, policy documents, or working documents that demonstrate use
of the supply chain cyber security risk management plan.
Page 4 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager or delegate
approval of its supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s) specified in
Requirement R1 at least once every 15 calendar months. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. Evidence shall include the dated supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s)
approved by the CIP Senior Manager or delegate(s) and additional evidence to
demonstrate review of the supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s).
Evidence may include, but is not limited to, policy documents, revision history,
records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management system that
indicate review of supply chain risk management plan(s) at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager or delegate.
Page 5 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity,
or any entity as otherwise designated by an Applicable Governmental Authority,
in their respective roles of monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with
mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in their respective
jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period of time an entity
is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to
show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and
Enforcement Program” refers to the identification of the processes that will be
used to evaluate data or information for the purpose of assessing performance
or outcomes with the associated Reliability Standard.
Page 6 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity’s supply The Responsible Entity’s supply The Responsible Entity’s supply The Responsible Entity’s supply
chain cyber risk management chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk
plan(s) did not include one of management plan(s) did not management plan(s) did not management plan(s) did not
the parts in Part 1.2.1 through include two or more of the include the use of process(es) include the use of process(es)
Part 1.2.6. parts in Part 1.2.1 through Part in planning for procurement of in planning for procurement
1.2.6. applicable systems as specified applicable systems as specified
in Part 1.1. in Part 1.1, and the supply
chain cyber security risk
OR
management plan(s) did not
The Responsible Entity’s supply include the use of process(es)
chain cyber security risk for procuring applicable
management plan(s) did not systems as specified in Part
include the use of process(es) 1.2.
for procuring applicable
OR
systems as specified in Part
1.2. The Responsible Entity did not
develop one or more
documented supply chain
cyber security risk
management plan(s) as
specified in Requirement R1.
R2. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
implement one of the parts in implement two or more of the implement the use of implement the use of
Part 1.2.1 through Part 1.2.6. parts in Part 1.2.1 through Part process(es) for procuring process(es) in planning for
1.2.6. applicable systems as specified procurement of applicable
in Part 1.2. systems as specified in Part
1.1, and did not implement the
use of process(es) for
Page 7 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
procuring applicable systems
as specified in Part 1.2;
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement its supply chain
cyber security risk
management plan(s) specified
in Requirement R2.
R3. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not
exceeded 15 calendar months exceeded the 15 calendar exceeded 15 calendar months review and obtain CIP Senior
by reviewing and obtaining CIP months by reviewing and by reviewing and obtaining CIP Manager or delegate approval
Senior Manager or delegate obtaining CIP Senior Manager Senior Manager or delegate of its supply chain cyber
approval of its supply chain or delegate approval of its approval of its supply chain security risk management
cyber security risk supply chain cyber security risk cyber security risk plan(s) within 18 calendar
management plan(s) in the 16th management plan(s) in the 17th management plan(s) in the 18th months of the previous review.
calendar month since the calendar month since the calendar month since the
previous review. previous review. previous review.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-013-3 Technical Rationale
Page 8 of 9
CIP-013-3 - Cyber Security – Supply Chain Risk Management
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board Respond to FERC Order No. 829.
of Trustees.
1 10/18/18 FERC Order approving CIP-
013-1. Docket No. RM17-13-
000.
2 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board Modifications to address
of Trustees. directive in FERC Order No. 850.
2 3/18/2021 FERC Order approving CIP-
013-2. Docket No. RD21-2-
000.
3 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board Virtualization Modifications by
of Trustees Project 2016-02
Page 9 of 9
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-013-3.pdf ---

