--- START DOCUMENT: cip-009-6.pdf ---
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
2. Number: CIP-009-6
3. Purpose: To recover reliability functions performed by BES Cyber Systems by
specifying recovery plan requirements in support of the continued
stability, operability, and reliability of the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional entity
or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities, systems,
and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load shedding
(UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme where the
Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Interchange Coordinator or Interchange Authority
4.1.6 Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
4.1.7 Transmission Operator
4.1.8 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above
are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or restoration
of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme where the
Special Protection System or Remedial Action Scheme is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-009-6:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security Perimeters.
4.2.3.3 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R.
Section 73.54.
Page 2 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
4.2.3.4 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not included
in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber Systems
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the CIP-002-5.1
identification and categorization processes.
5. Effective Dates:
See Implementation Plan for CIP-009-6.
6. Background:
Standard CIP-009 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber security,
which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems and
require a minimum level of organizational, operational, and procedural controls to
mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements.
An entity should include as much as it believes necessary in their documented
processes, but they must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident
response plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an
approach involving multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the
standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training
program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be
referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any
additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
Page 3 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented processes.
These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk
Electric System. A review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability
standards for UFLS program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of
300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems
to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management
Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact
and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used in the
“Applicable Systems” column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at Control Centers – Only applies to BES Cyber
Systems located at a Control Center and categorized as medium impact according
to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization processes.
• Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced high
impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples include,
but are not limited to firewalls, authentication servers, and log monitoring and
alerting systems.
• Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access Control
System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium
impact BES Cyber System with External Routable Connectivity.
Page 4 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more documented recovery plan(s) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-009-6 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M1. Evidence must include the documented recovery plan(s) that collectively include the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
009-6 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications.
CIP-009-6 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Conditions for activation of the recovery An example of evidence may include, but
associated: plan(s). is not limited to, one or more plans that
1. EACMS; and include language identifying conditions
for activation of the recovery plan(s).
2. PACS
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Roles and responsibilities of responders. An example of evidence may include, but
associated: is not limited to, one or more recovery
1. EACMS; and plans that include language identifying
the roles and responsibilities of
2. PACS
responders.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Page 5 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-6 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes for the backup An example of evidence may include, but
associated: and storage of information required to is not limited to, documentation of
1. EACMS; and recover BES Cyber System functionality. specific processes for the backup and
storage of information required to
2. PACS
recover BES Cyber System functionality.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes to verify the An example of evidence may include, but
associated: successful completion of the backup is not limited to, logs, workflow or other
1. EACMS; and processes in Part 1.3 and to address any documentation confirming that the
backup failures. backup process completed successfully
2. PACS
and backup failures, if any, were
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
addressed.
Control Centers and their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes to preserve data, An example of evidence may include, but
associated: per Cyber Asset capability, for is not limited to, procedures to preserve
1. EACMS; and determining the cause of a Cyber data, such as preserving a corrupted drive
Security Incident that triggers activation or making a data mirror of the system
2. PACS
of the recovery plan(s). Data before proceeding with recovery.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
preservation should not impede or
their associated:
restrict recovery.
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
Page 6 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement its documented recovery plan(s) to collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-009-6 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning and Real-time Operations.]
M2. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates implementation of each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-009-6 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing.
CIP-009-6 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Test each of the recovery plans referenced An example of evidence may include, but
associated: in Requirement R1 at least once every 15 is not limited to, dated evidence of a test
1. EACMS; and calendar months: (by recovering from an actual incident,
with a paper drill or tabletop exercise, or
2. PACS
• By recovering from an actual incident;
with an operational exercise) of the
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
• With a paper drill or tabletop exercise; recovery plan at least once every 15
Control Centers and their associated:
or calendar months. For the paper drill or
1. EACMS; and
full operational exercise, evidence may
• With an operational exercise.
2. PACS include meeting notices, minutes, or other
records of exercise findings.
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Test a representative sample of An example of evidence may include,
their associated: information used to recover BES Cyber but is not limited to, operational logs
1. EACMS; and System functionality at least once or test results with criteria for testing
every 15 calendar months to ensure the usability (e.g. sample tape load,
2. PACS
that the information is useable and is browsing tape contents) and
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
compatible with current compatibility with current system
Control Centers and their associated:
configurations. configurations (e.g. manual or
1. EACMS; and
automated comparison checkpoints
2. PACS
between backup media contents and
An actual recovery that incorporates
current configuration).
the information used to recover BES
Cyber System functionality substitutes
for this test.
Page 7 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-6 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems Test each of the recovery plans Examples of evidence may include, but
referenced in Requirement R1 at least are not limited to, dated
once every 36 calendar months documentation of:
through an operational exercise of the
• An operational exercise at least
recovery plans in an environment
once every 36 calendar months
representative of the production
between exercises, that
environment.
demonstrates recovery in a
An actual recovery response may representative environment; or
substitute for an operational exercise.
• An actual recovery response that
occurred within the 36 calendar
month timeframe that exercised
the recovery plans.
Page 8 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall maintain each of its recovery plan(s) in accordance with each of the applicable requirement parts
in CIP-009-6 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon:
Operations Assessment].
M3. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-009-6 Table R3 – Recovery
Plan Review, Update and Communication.
CIP-009-6 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their No later than 90 calendar days after An example of evidence may include, but
associated: completion of a recovery plan test or actual is not limited to, all of the following:
1. EACMS; and recovery:
1. Dated documentation of identified
2. PACS
3.1.1. Document any lessons learned deficiencies or lessons learned for
associated with a recovery plan each recovery plan test or actual
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
test or actual recovery or incident recovery or dated
Control Centers and their associated:
document the absence of any documentation stating there were
1. EACMS; and
lessons learned; no lessons learned;
2. PACS
3.1.2. Update the recovery plan based on 2. Dated and revised recovery plan
any documented lessons learned showing any changes based on the
associated with the plan; and lessons learned; and
3.1.3. Notify each person or group with a 3. Evidence of plan update
defined role in the recovery plan of distribution including, but not
the updates to the recovery plan limited to:
based on any documented lessons • Emails;
learned.
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system;
or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 9 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-6 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their No later than 60 calendar days after a An example of evidence may include, but
associated: change to the roles or responsibilities, is not limited to, all of the following:
1. EACMS; and responders, or technology that the
1. Dated and revised recovery plan
Responsible Entity determines would
2. PACS
with changes to the roles or
impact the ability to execute the recovery
responsibilities, responders, or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
plan:
technology; and
Control Centers and their associated:
3.2.1. Update the recovery plan; and
1. EACMS; and
2. Evidence of plan update
2. PACS 3.2.2. Notify each person or group with a distribution including, but not
defined role in the recovery plan of limited to:
the updates.
• Emails;
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution
system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 10 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means
NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance
with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required to
retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence
retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask
an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since
the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified below
unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as part of an
investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard for three
calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the non-
compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time specified above,
whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent audit
records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
Compliance Audits
Self-Certifications
Spot Checking
Compliance Investigations
Self-Reporting
Complaints
1.4. Additional Compliance Information:
None
Page 11 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
2. Table of Compliance Elements
Time Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-6)
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Long-term Medium N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has developed recovery has developed recovery has not created
plan(s), but the plan(s) plan(s), but the plan(s) recovery plan(s) for BES
do not address one of do not address two of Cyber Systems.
the requirements the requirements OR
included in Parts 1.2 included in Parts 1.2 The Responsible Entity
through 1.5. through 1.5. has created recovery
plan(s) for BES Cyber
Systems, but the
plan(s) does not
address the conditions
for activation in Part
1.1.
OR
The Responsible Entity
has created recovery
plan(s) for BES Cyber
Systems, but the
plan(s) does not
address three or more
of the requirements in
Parts 1.2 through 1.5.
R2 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has not tested the has not tested the has not tested the has not tested the
Real-time recovery plan(s) recovery plan(s) recovery plan(s) recovery plan(s)
Operations according to R2 Part within 16 calendar according to R2 Part according to R2 Part
2.1 within 15 calendar months, not exceeding 2.1 within 17 calendar 2.1 within 18 calendar
months, not 17 calendar months months, not months between tests
exceeding 16 calendar between tests of the exceeding 18 calendar of the plan. (2.1)
months between tests plan. (2.1) months between tests OR
of the plan. (2.1) OR of the plan. (2.1) The Responsible Entity
OR The Responsible Entity OR has not tested a
has not tested a representative sample
Page 12 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Time Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-6)
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity representative sample The Responsible Entity of the information
has not tested a of the information has not tested a used in the recovery of
representative sample used in the recovery representative sample BES Cyber System
of the information of BES Cyber System of the information functionality according
used in the recovery functionality according used in the recovery of to R2 Part 2.2 within
of BES Cyber System to R2 Part 2.2 within BES Cyber System 18 calendar months
functionality 16 calendar months, functionality according between tests. (2.2)
according to R2 Part not exceeding 17 to R2 Part 2.2 within OR
2.2 within 15 calendar calendar months 17 calendar months, The Responsible Entity
months, not between tests. (2.2) not exceeding 18 has not tested the
exceeding 16 calendar OR calendar months recovery plan(s)
months between The Responsible Entity between tests. (2.2) according to R2 Part
tests. (2.2) has not tested the OR 2.3 within 39 calendar
OR recovery plan The Responsible Entity months between tests
The Responsible Entity according to R2 Part has not tested the of the plan. (2.3)
has not tested the 2.3 within 37 calendar recovery plan
recovery plan months, not exceeding according to R2 Part
according to R2 Part 38 calendar months 2.3 within 38 calendar
2.3 within 36 calendar between tests. (2.3) months, not
months, not exceeding 39 calendar
exceeding 37 calendar months between
months between tests. (2.3)
tests. (2.3)
R3 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Assessment has not notified each has not updated the has neither has neither
person or group with a recovery plan(s) based documented lessons documented lessons
defined role in the on any documented learned nor learned nor
recovery plan(s) of lessons learned within documented the documented the
updates within 90 and 90 and less than 120 absence of any lessons absence of any lessons
less than 120 calendar calendar days of each learned within 90 and learned within 120
days of the update recovery plan test or less than 120 calendar calendar days of each
being completed. actual recovery. (3.1.2) days of each recovery recovery plan test or
(3.1.3) OR plan test or actual actual recovery. (3.1.1)
The Responsible Entity recovery. (3.1.1)
has not notified each OR
Page 13 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Time Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-6)
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
person or group with a The Responsible Entity
defined role in the has not updated the
recovery plan(s) of recovery plan(s) based
updates within 120 on any documented
calendar days of the lessons learned within
update being 120 calendar days of
completed. (3.1.3) each recovery plan test
OR or actual recovery.
The Responsible Entity (3.1.2)
has not updated the OR
recovery plan(s) or The Responsible Entity
notified each person or has not updated the
group with a defined recovery plan(s) or
role within 60 and less notified each person or
than 90 calendar days group with a defined
of any of the following role within 90 calendar
changes that the days of any of the
responsible entity following changes that
determines would the responsible entity
impact the ability to determines would
execute the plan: (3.2) impact the ability to
• Roles or execute the plan: (3.2)
responsibilities, or • Roles or
• Responders, or responsibilities, or
• Technology changes. • Responders, or
• Technology changes.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None
Page 14 of 20
CIP-009-6 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements
and to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or
system from service in order to perform
testing, in response to FERC order issued
September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP standards
and to revise
format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-009-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed FERC
directives from
Order No. 791
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-009-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
Page 15 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Section 4 – Scope of Applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Standards
Section “4. Applicability” of the standards provides important information for Responsible Entities to
determine the scope of the applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Requirements.
Section “4.1. Functional Entities” is a list of NERC functional entities to which the standard applies. If the
entity is registered as one or more of the functional entities listed in Section 4.1, then the NERC CIP
Cyber Security Standards apply. Note that there is a qualification in Section 4.1 that restricts the
applicability in the case of Distribution Providers to only those that own certain types of systems and
equipment listed in 4.2.
Section “4.2. Facilities” defines the scope of the Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by the
Responsible Entity, as qualified in Section 4.1, that is subject to the requirements of the standard. As
specified in the exemption section 4.2.3.5, this standard does not apply to Responsible Entities that do
not have High Impact or Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems under CIP-002-5.1’s categorization. In
addition to the set of BES Facilities, Control Centers, and other systems and equipment, the list includes
the set of systems and equipment owned by Distribution Providers. While the NERC Glossary term
“Facilities” already includes the BES characteristic, the additional use of the term BES here is meant to
reinforce the scope of applicability of these Facilities where it is used, especially in this applicability
scoping section. This in effect sets the scope of Facilities, systems, and equipment that is subject to the
standards.
Requirement R1:
The following guidelines are available to assist in addressing the required components of a recovery
plan:
• NERC, Security Guideline for the Electricity Sector: Continuity of Business Processes and Operations
Operational Functions, September 2011, online at
http://www.nerc.com/docs/cip/sgwg/Continuity%20of%20Business%20and%20Operational%20Fu
nctions%20FINAL%20102511.pdf
• National Institute of Standards and Technology, Contingency Planning Guide for Federal
Information Systems, Special Publication 800-34 revision 1, May 2010, online at
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-34-rev1/sp800-34-rev1_errata-Nov11-2010.pdf
The term recovery plan is used throughout this Reliability Standard to refer to a documented set of
instructions and resources needed to recover reliability functions performed by BES Cyber Systems. The
recovery plan may exist as part of a larger business continuity or disaster recovery plan, but the term
does not imply any additional obligations associated with those disciplines outside of the Requirements.
A documented recovery plan may not be necessary for each applicable BES Cyber System. For example,
the short-term recovery plan for a BES Cyber System in a specific substation may be managed on a daily
basis by advanced power system applications such as state estimation, contingency and remedial action,
and outage scheduling. One recovery plan for BES Cyber Systems should suffice for several similar
facilities such as those found in substations or power plants.
Page 16 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
For Part 1.1, the conditions for activation of the recovery plan should consider viable threats to the BES
Cyber System such as natural disasters, computing equipment failures, computing environment failures,
and Cyber Security Incidents. A business impact analysis for the BES Cyber System may be useful in
determining these conditions.
For Part 1.2, entities should identify the individuals required for responding to a recovery operation of
the applicable BES Cyber System.
For Part 1.3, entities should consider the following types of information to recover BES Cyber System
functionality:
1. Installation files and media;
2. Current backup tapes and any additional documented configuration settings;
3. Documented build or restoration procedures; and
4. Cross site replication storage.
For Part 1.4, the processes to verify the successful completion of backup processes should include
checking for: (1) usability of backup media, (2) logs or inspection showing that information from current,
production system could be read, and (3) logs or inspection showing that information was written to the
backup media. Test restorations are not required for this Requirement Part. The following backup
scenarios provide examples of effective processes to verify successful completion and detect any backup
failures:
• Periodic (e.g. daily or weekly) backup process – Review generated logs or job status reports and set
up notifications for backup failures.
• Non-periodic backup process– If a single backup is provided during the commissioning of the
system, then only the initial and periodic (every 15 months) testing must be done. Additional
testing should be done as necessary and can be a part of the configuration change management
program.
• Data mirroring – Configure alerts on the failure of data transfer for an amount of time specified by
the entity (e.g. 15 minutes) in which the information on the mirrored disk may no longer be useful
for recovery.
• Manual configuration information – Inspect the information used for recovery prior to storing
initially and periodically (every 15 months). Additional inspection should be done as necessary and
can be a part of the configuration change management program.
The plan must also include processes to address backup failures. These processes should specify the
response to failure notifications or other forms of identification.
For Part 1.5, the recovery plan must include considerations for preservation of data to determine the
cause of a Cyber Security Incident. Because it is not always possible to initially know if a Cyber Security
Incident caused the recovery activation, the data preservation procedures should be followed until such
point a Cyber Security Incident can be ruled out. CIP-008 addresses the retention of data associated with
a Cyber Security Incident.
Page 17 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Requirement R2:
A Responsible Entity must exercise each BES Cyber System recovery plan every 15 months. However,
this does not necessarily mean that the entity must test each plan individually. BES Cyber Systems that
are numerous and distributed, such as those found at substations, may not require an individual
recovery plan and the associated redundant facilities since reengineering and reconstruction may be the
generic response to a severe event. Conversely, there is typically one control center per bulk
transmission service area that requires a redundant or backup facility. Because of these differences, the
recovery plans associated with control centers differ a great deal from those associated with power
plants and substations.
A recovery plan test does not necessarily cover all aspects of a recovery plan and failure scenarios, but
the test should be sufficient to ensure the plan is up to date and at least one restoration process of the
applicable cyber systems is covered.
Entities may use an actual recovery as a substitute for exercising the plan every 15 months. Otherwise,
entities must exercise the plan with a paper drill, tabletop exercise, or operational exercise. For more
specific types of exercises, refer to the FEMA Homeland Security Exercise and Evaluation Program
(HSEEP). It lists the following four types of discussion-based exercises: seminar, workshop, tabletop,
and games. In particular, it defines that, “A tabletop exercise involves key personnel discussing
simulated scenarios in an informal setting. [Table top exercises (TTX)] can be used to assess plans,
policies, and procedures.”
The HSEEP lists the following three types of operations-based exercises: Drill, functional exercise, and
full-scale exercise. It defines that, “[A] full-scale exercise is a multi-agency, multi-jurisdictional, multi-
discipline exercise involving functional (e.g., joint field office, Emergency operation centers, etc.) and
‘boots on the ground’ response (e.g., firefighters decontaminating mock victims).”
For Part 2.2, entities should refer to the backup and storage of information required to recover BES
Cyber System functionality in Requirement Part 1.3. This provides additional assurance that the
information will actually recover the BES Cyber System as necessary. For most complex computing
equipment, a full test of the information is not feasible. Entities should determine the representative
sample of information that provides assurance in the processes for Requirement Part 1.3. The test must
include steps for ensuring the information is useable and current. For backup media, this can include
testing a representative sample to make sure the information can be loaded, and checking the content
to make sure the information reflects the current configuration of the applicable Cyber Assets.
Requirement R3:
This requirement ensures entities maintain recovery plans. There are two requirement parts that trigger
plan updates: (1) lessons learned and (2) organizational or technology changes.
The documentation of lessons learned is associated with each recovery activation, and it involves the
activities as illustrated in Figure 1, below. The deadline to document lessons learned starts after the
completion of the recovery operation in recognition that complex recovery activities can take a few days
or weeks to complete. The process of conducting lessons learned can involve the recovery team
discussing the incident to determine gaps or areas of improvement within the plan. It is possible to have
Page 18 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
a recovery activation without any documented lessons learned. In such cases, the entity must retain
documentation of the absence of any lessons learned associated with the recovery activation.
4/14
1/1 - 1/14
Complete Plan
Recovery operation
Update Activities
(Actual or Exercise)
1/1 - 1/14 1/14 - 4/14
Incident Document Lessons Learned, Update Plan, and Distribute Updates
1/1 4/14
Figure 1: CIP-009-6 R3 Timeline
The activities necessary to complete the lessons learned include updating the plan and distributing those
updates. Entities should consider meeting with all of the individuals involved in the recovery and
documenting the lessons learned as soon after the recovery activation as possible. This allows more time
for making effective updates to the plan, obtaining any necessary approvals, and distributing those
updates to the recovery team.
The plan change requirement is associated with organization and technology changes referenced in the
plan and involves the activities illustrated in Figure 2, below. Organizational changes include changes to
the roles and responsibilities people have in the plan or changes to the response groups or individuals.
This may include changes to the names or contact information listed in the plan. Technology changes
affecting the plan may include referenced information sources, communication systems, or ticketing
systems.
1/1 3/1
Organization and Complete Plan
Technology Changes Update Activities
1/1 - 3/1
Update Plan and Distribute Updates
1/1 3/1
Figure 2: Timeline for Plan Changes in 3.2
When notifying individuals of response plan changes, entities should keep in mind that recovery plans
may be considered BES Cyber System Information, and they should take the appropriate measures to
prevent unauthorized disclosure of recovery plan information. For example, the recovery plan itself, or
other sensitive information about the recovery plan, should be redacted from Email or other
unencrypted transmission.
Rationale:
Page 19 of 20
Guidelines and Technical Basis
During development of this standard, text boxes were embedded within the standard to explain the
rationale for various parts of the standard. Upon BOT approval, the text from the rationale text boxes
was moved to this section.
Rationale for Requirement R1:
Preventative activities can lower the number of incidents, but not all incidents can be prevented. A
preplanned recovery capability is, therefore, necessary for rapidly recovering from incidents, minimizing
loss and destruction, mitigating the weaknesses that were exploited, and restoring computing services
so that planned and consistent recovery action to restore BES Cyber System functionality occurs.
Rationale for Requirement R2:
The implementation of an effective recovery plan mitigates the risk to the reliable operation of the BES
by reducing the time to recover from various hazards affecting BES Cyber Systems. This requirement
ensures continued implementation of the response plans.
Requirement Part 2.2 provides further assurance in the information (e.g. backup tapes, mirrored hot-
sites, etc.) necessary to recover BES Cyber Systems. A full test is not feasible in most instances due to the
amount of recovery information, and the Responsible Entity must determine a sampling that provides
assurance in the usability of the information.
Rationale for Requirement R3:
To improve the effectiveness of BES Cyber System recovery plan(s) following a test, and to ensure the
maintenance and distribution of the recovery plan(s). Responsible Entities achieve this by (i) performing
a lessons learned review in 3.1 and (ii) revising the plan in 3.2 based on specific changes in the
organization or technology that would impact plan execution. In both instances when the plan needs to
change, the Responsible Entity updates and distributes the plan.
Page 20 of 20
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-009-6.pdf ---

