--- START DOCUMENT: cip-011-3.pdf ---
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Information Protection
2. Number: CIP-011-3
3. Purpose: To prevent unauthorized access to BES Cyber System Information (BCSI) by
specifying information protection requirements in support of protecting BES Cyber
Systems against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk
Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load
shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above
are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements in
a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-011-3:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters.
4.2.3.3 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
Page 2 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
4.2.3.4 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not
included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact according to
the CIP-002-5.1a identification and categorization processes.
5. Effective Dates: See Implementation Plan for CIP-011-3.
6. Background: Standard CIP-011 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber
security, which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems
and require a minimum level of organizational, operational, and procedural controls to
mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements. An
entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes, but
it must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident response
plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an approach involving
multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the standards
include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training program.
The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be referred to as
a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any additional
requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES Cyber
Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes themselves.
Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show documentation and
Page 3 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
implementation of applicable items in the documented processes. These measures
serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of compliance and should
not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the requirements
and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered items are items that
are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version 1
of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the BES. A
review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability standards for UFLS program
requirements to date indicates that the historical value of 300 MW represents an
adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems
to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management
Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact and
connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used in the “Applicable
Systems” column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002-5.1a identification and categorization
processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP-002-5.1a identification and categorization
processes.
• Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced high
impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples may
include, but are not limited to, firewalls, authentication servers, and log
monitoring and alerting systems.
• Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access Control
System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium
impact BES Cyber System with External Routable Connectivity.
• Protected Cyber Assets (PCA) – Applies to each Protected Cyber Asset associated
with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber
System.
Page 4 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented information protection program(s) for BES Cyber System
Information (BCSI) pertaining to “Applicable Systems” identified in CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
that collectively includes each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program.
[Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M1. Evidence for the information protection program must include the applicable requirement parts in CIP-011-3 Table R1 –
Information Protection Program and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures
column of the table.
CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Method(s) to identify BCSI. Examples of acceptable evidence may
their associated: include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. EACMS; and
• Documented method(s) to identify
2. PACS
BCSI from the entity’s information
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
protection program; or
and their associated:
• Indications on information (e.g.,
1. EACMS; and
labels or classification) that identify
BCSI as designated in the entity’s
2. PACS
information protection program; or
• Training materials that provide
personnel with sufficient
knowledge to identify BCSI; or
• Storage locations identified for
housing BCSI in the entity’s
information protection program.
Page 6 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Method(s) to protect and securely Examples of evidence for on-premise
their associated: handle BCSI to mitigate risks of BCSI may include, but are not limited
compromising confidentiality. to, the following:
1. EACMS; and
• Procedures for protecting and
2. PACS
securely handling, which
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
include topics such as storage,
and their associated:
security during transit, and use
of BCSI; or
1. EACMS; and
• Records indicating that BCSI is
2. PACS
handled in a manner consistent
with the entity’s documented
procedure(s).
Examples of evidence for off-premise
BCSI may include, but are not limited
to, the following:
• Implementation of electronic
technical method(s) to protect
electronic BCSI (e.g., data
masking, encryption, hashing,
tokenization, cipher, electronic
key management); or
• Implementation of physical
technical method(s) to protect
physical BCSI (e.g., physical lock
and key management, physical
badge management,
biometrics, alarm system); or
Page 7 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
CIP-011-3 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
• Implementation of
administrative method(s) to
protect BCSI (e.g., vendor
service risk assessments,
business agreements).
Page 8 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-011-3 Table R2 – BES Cyber Asset Reuse and Disposal. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon:
Operations Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-011-3 Table R2 – BES Cyber Asset Reuse and Disposal and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-011-3 Table R2 – BES Cyber Asset Reuse and Disposal
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
Prior to the release for reuse of
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Examples of acceptable evidence may
applicable Cyber Assets that contain
their associated: include, but are not limited to, the
BCSI (except for reuse within other
following:
1. EACMS;
systems identified in the “Applicable
Systems” column), the Responsible
• Records tracking sanitization actions
2. PACS; and
taken to prevent unauthorized
Entity shall take action to prevent the
3. PCA
retrieval of BCSI such as clearing,
unauthorized retrieval of BCSI from
purging, or destroying; or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems the Cyber Asset data storage media.
and their associated:
• Records tracking actions such as
encrypting, retaining in the Physical
1. EACMS;
Security Perimeter or other methods
2. PACS; and
used to prevent unauthorized
3. PCA retrieval of BCSI.
Page 9 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
CIP-011-3 Table R2 – BES Cyber Asset Reuse and Disposal
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Prior to the disposal of applicable Examples of acceptable evidence may
their associated: Cyber Assets that contain BCSI, the include, but are not limited to, the
Responsible Entity shall take action to following:
1. EACMS;
prevent the unauthorized retrieval of
• Records that indicate that data
2. PACS; and BCSI from the Cyber Asset or destroy
storage media was destroyed
the data storage media.
3. PCA prior to the disposal of an
applicable Cyber Asset; or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
• Records of actions taken to
and their associated:
prevent unauthorized retrieval of
1. EACMS;
BCSI prior to the disposal of an
applicable Cyber Asset.
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
Page 10 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
B. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring and/or
enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in
their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period
of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is
shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide
other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last
audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of
time as part of an investigation:
• The applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard
for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the
time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
Page 11 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-011-3)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Operations Medium N/A N/A The Responsible The Responsible
Planning Entity documented, Entity neither
but did not, documented nor
implement one or implemented one or
more BCSI protection more BCSI protection
program(s). (R1) program(s). (R1)
OR
The Responsible
Entity documented
but did not
implement at least
one method to
identify BCSI. (1.1)
OR
The Responsible
Entity documented
but did not
implement at least
one method to
protect and securely
handle BCSI. (1.2)
R2 Operations Lower N/A The Responsible The Responsible The Responsible
Planning Entity implemented Entity implemented Entity has not
one or more one or more documented or
documented documented implemented any
Page 12 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-011-3)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
processes but did processes but did processes for
not include not include disposal applicable
processes for reuse or media destruction requirement parts in
as to prevent the processes to prevent CIP-011-3 Table R3 –
unauthorized the unauthorized BES Cyber Asset
retrieval of BCSI retrieval of BCSI Reuse and Disposal.
from the BES Cyber from the BES Cyber (R2)
Asset. (2.1) Asset. (2.2)
Page 13 of 14
CIP-011-3 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
C. Regional Variances
None.
D. Interpretations
None.
E. Associated Documents
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Developed to define the
Trustees. information protection
requirements in coordination
with other CIP standards and
to address the balance of the
FERC directives in its Order
706.
1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
011-1. (Order becomes effective
on 2/3/14.)
2 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Addressed two FERC directives
Trustees. from Order No. 791 related to
identify, assess, and correct
language and communication
networks.
2 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Replaces the version adopted
Trustees. by the Board on 11/13/2014.
Revised version addresses
remaining directives from
Order No. 791 related to
transient devices and low
impact BES Cyber Systems.
2 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
011-2. Docket No. RM15-14-000
Revised to enhance BES
3 8/12/21 Adopted by the NERC Board of
reliability for entities to manage
Trustees
their BCSI.
Page 14 of 14
Version Date Action Change Tracking
“A Responsible Entity may elect
3 12/7/21 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
to comply with the requirements
011-3 Docket No. RD21-6-000
in CIP-004-7 and CIP-011-3
following their approval by the
applicable governmental
authority, but prior to their
Effective Date. In such a case, the
Responsible Entity shall notify the
applicable Regional Entities of
the date of compliance with the
CIP-004-7 and CIP-011-3
Reliability Standards. Responsible
Entities must comply with CIP-
004-6 and CIP-011-2 until that
date.”
Page 14 of 14
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-011-3.pdf ---

