--- START DOCUMENT: cip-002-7.pdf ---
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
2. Number: CIP-002-7
3. Purpose: To identify and categorize BES Cyber Systems (BCS) and their associated
BES Cyber Assets (BCA) for the application of cyber security requirements
commensurate with the adverse impact that loss, compromise, or misuse of those BCS
could have on the reliable operation of the Bulk Electric System (BES). Identification
and categorization of BCS support appropriate protection against compromises that
could lead to misoperation or instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein,
the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
Page 1 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-002-7:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends
to one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan”
Page 3 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement a process that considers each of the
following assets for purposes of Parts 1.1 through 1.3: [Violation Risk Factor:
High][Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
i. Control Centers and backup Control Centers;
ii. Transmission stations and substations;
iii. Generation resources;
iv. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart
Resources and Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements;
v. RAS that support the reliable operation of the BES; and
vi. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability
section 4.2.1 above.
1.1. Identify each of the high impact BCS according to Attachment 1, Section 1, if
any, at each asset;
1.2. Identify each of the medium impact BCS according to Attachment 1, Section 2,
if any, at each asset; and
1.3. Identify each asset that contains a low impact BCS according to Attachment 1,
Section 3, if any (a discrete list of low impact BCS is not required).
M1. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, dated electronic or physical lists
required by Requirement R1.
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall: [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations
Planning]
2.1 Review the identifications in Requirement R1 and its parts (and update them if
there are changes identified) at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it
has no identified items in Requirement R1, and
2.2 Have its CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications required
by Requirement R1 at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it has no
identified items in Requirement R1.
M2. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, electronic or physical dated
records to demonstrate that the Responsible Entity has reviewed and updated, where
necessary, the identifications required in Requirement R1 and its parts, and has had its
CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications required in Requirement
R1 and its parts at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it has none identified
in Requirement R1 and its parts, as required by Requirement R2.
Page 4 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any
entity as otherwise designated by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their
respective roles of monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and
enforceable Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show
that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and
Enforcement Program” refers to the identification of the processes that will be
used to evaluate data or information for the purpose of assessing performance
or outcomes with the associated Reliability Standard.
Page 5 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
Violation Severity Levels
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-7)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1
For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with
more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES
assets in Requirement R1, five assets in Requirement R1, more assets in Requirement R1, more assets in Requirement R1, more
percent or fewer BES assets than five percent but less than than 10 percent but less than than 15 percent of BES assets
have not been considered or equal to 10 percent of BES or equal to 15 percent of BES have not been considered,
according to Requirement R1; assets have not been assets have not been according to Requirement R1;
considered, according to considered, according to
OR OR
Requirement R1; Requirement R1;
For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a
OR OR
total of 40 or fewer BES assets, total of 40 or fewer BES assets,
2 or fewer BES assets in For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a more than six BES assets in
Requirement R1, have not been total of 40 or fewer BES assets, total of 40 or fewer BES assets, Requirement R1, have not been
considered according to more than two, but fewer than more than four, but fewer than considered according to
Requirement R1; or equal to four BES assets in or equal to six BES assets in Requirement R1;
Requirement R1, have not been Requirement R1, have not been
OR OR
considered according to considered according to
For Responsible Entities with Requirement R1; Requirement R1; For Responsible Entities with
more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high
OR OR
and medium impact BCS, five and medium impact BCS, more
percent or fewer of identified For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with than 15 percent of identified
BCS have not been categorized more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high BCS have not been categorized
or have been incorrectly and medium impact BCS, more or medium impact BCS, more or have been incorrectly
categorized at a lower than five percent but less than than 10 percent but less than categorized at a lower
category; or equal to 10 percent of or equal to 15 percent of category;
identified BCS have not been identified BCS have not been
OR OR
categorized or have been categorized or have been
For Responsible Entities with a incorrectly categorized at a incorrectly categorized at a For Responsible Entities with a
total of 100 or fewer high and lower category; lower category; total of 100 or fewer high and
medium impact BCS, five or medium impact BCS, more
Page 6 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-7)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
fewer identified BCS have not OR OR than 15 identified BCS have not
been categorized or have been been categorized or have been
For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a
incorrectly categorized at a incorrectly categorized at a
total of 100 or fewer high and total of 100 or fewer high or
lower category. lower category.
medium impact BCS, more than medium impact BCS, more than
OR five but less than or equal to 10 10 but less than or equal to 15 OR
identified BES Cyber Systems identified BCS have not been
For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with
have not been categorized or categorized or have been
more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high
have been incorrectly incorrectly categorized at a
and medium impact BCS, five and medium impact BCS, more
categorized at a lower lower category.
percent or fewer high or than 15 percent of high or
category.
medium BCS have not been OR medium impact BCS have not
identified; OR been identified;
For Responsible Entities with
OR For Responsible Entities with more than a total of 100 high OR
more than a total of 100 high and medium impact BCS, more
For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a
and medium impact BCS, more than 10 percent but less than
total of 100 or fewer high and total of 100 or fewer high and
than five percent but less than or equal to 15 percent high or
medium impact BCS, five or medium impact BES Cyber
or equal to 10 percent high or medium BCS have not been
fewer high or medium BCS Systems, more than 15 high or
medium BCS have not been identified;
have not been identified. medium impact BCS have not
identified;
OR been identified.
OR
For Responsible Entities with a
For Responsible Entities with a total of 100 or fewer high and
total of 100 or fewer high and medium impact BCS, more than
medium impact BCS, more than 10 but less than or equal to 15
five but less than or equal to 10 high or medium BCS have not
high or medium BCS have not been identified.
been identified.
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
complete its review and update complete its review and update complete its review and update complete its review and update
Page 7 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-7)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
for the identification required for the identification required for the identification required for the identification required
for Requirement R1 within 15 for Requirement R1 within 16 for Requirement R1 within 17 for Requirement R1 within 18
calendar months but less than calendar months but less than calendar months but less than calendar months of the
or equal to 16 calendar months or equal to 17 calendar months or equal to 18 calendar months previous review. (Part 2.1)
of the previous review. (Part of the previous review. of the previous review. (Part
OR
2.1) (Part2.1) 2.1)
The Responsible Entity failed to
OR OR OR
complete its approval of the
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity failed to The Responsible Entity failed to identifications required by
complete its approval of the complete its approval of the complete its approval of the Requirement R1 by the CIP
identifications required by identifications required by identifications required by Senior Manager or delegate
Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP according to Requirement R2
Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate within 18 calendar months of
according to Requirement R2 according to Requirement R2 according to Requirement R2 the previous approval. (Part
within 15 calendar months but within 16 calendar months but within 17 calendar months but 2.2)
less than or equal to 16 less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18
calendar months of the calendar months of the calendar months of the
previous approval. (Part 2.2) previous approval. (Part 2.2) previous approval. (Part 2.2)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-002-7 Technical Rationale
Page 8 of 12
CIP-002-7 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control center.” 3/24/06
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and to bring
the compliance elements into conformance with the
latest guidelines for developing compliance elements
of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a Responsible Entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated version number from -2 to -3. Update
Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 12/30/10 Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Asset Update
identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP standards
and to revise
format to use RBS
Template.
5.1 9/30/13 Replaced “Devices” with “Systems” in a definition in Errata
background section.
5.1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-002-5.1.
5.1a 11/02/16 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5.1a 12/14/201 FERC letter Order approving CIP-002-5.1a. Docket No.
6 RD17-2-000.
6 5/14/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified Criterion
2.12.
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Virtualization
Modifications
Page 9 of 12
Attachment 1
Attachment 1 – Impact Rating Criteria
Impact Rating Criteria
The criteria defined in Attachment 1 do not constitute stand-alone compliance requirements,
but are criteria characterizing the level of impact and are referenced by requirements.
1. High impact rating
Each BCS used by and located at any of the following:
1.1. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Reliability Coordinator.
1.2. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Balancing Authority: 1) for generation equal to or greater than an
aggregate of 3000 MW in a single Interconnection, or 2) for one or more of the assets
that meet criterion 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
1.3. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Transmission Operator for one or more of the assets that meet
criterion 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, or 2.10.
1.4 Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Generator Operator for one or more of the assets that meet
criterion 2.1, 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
2. Medium impact rating
Each BCS, not included in Section 1 above, associated with any of the following:
2.1. Commissioned generation, by each group of generating units at a single plant location,
with an aggregate highest rated net Real Power capability of the preceding 12
calendar months equal to or exceeding 1500 MW in a single Interconnection. For each
group of generating units, the only BCS that meet this criterion are each discrete
shared BCS that could, within 15 minutes, adversely impact the reliable operation of
any combination of units that in aggregate equal or exceed 1500 MW in a single
Interconnection.
2.2. Each BES reactive resource or group of resources at a single location (excluding
generation Facilities) with an aggregate maximum Reactive Power nameplate rating of
1000 MVAR or greater (excluding those at generation Facilities). The only BCS that
meet this criterion are each discrete shared BCS that could, within 15 minutes,
adversely impact the reliable operation of any combination of resources that in
aggregate equal or exceed 1000 MVAR.
2.3. Each generation Facility that its Planning Coordinator or Transmission Planner
designates, and informs the Generator Owner or Generator Operator, as necessary to
avoid an Adverse Reliability Impact in the planning horizon of more than one year.
2.4. Transmission Facilities operated at 500 kV or higher. For the purpose of this criterion,
the collector bus for a generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is
part of the generation interconnection Facility.
2.5. Transmission Facilities that are operating between 200 kV and 499 kV at a single
station or substation, where the station or substation is connected at 200 kV or higher
Page 10 of 12
Attachment 1
voltages to three or more other Transmission stations or substations and has an
"aggregate weighted value" exceeding 3000 according to the table below. The
"aggregate weighted value" for a single station or substation is determined by
summing the "weight value per line" shown in the table below for each incoming and
each outgoing BES Transmission Line that is connected to another Transmission
station or substation. For the purpose of this criterion, the collector bus for a
generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is part of the generation
interconnection Facility.
Voltage Value of a Line Weight Value per Line
less than 200 kV (not applicable) (not applicable)
200 kV to 299 kV 700
300 kV to 499 kV 1300
500 kV and above 0
2.6. Generation at a single plant location or Transmission Facilities at a single station or
substation location that are identified by its Reliability Coordinator, Planning
Coordinator, or Transmission Planner as critical to the derivation of Interconnection
Reliability Operating Limits (IROLs) and their associated contingencies.
2.7. Transmission Facilities identified as essential to meeting Nuclear Plant Interface
Requirements.
2.8. Transmission Facilities, including generation interconnection Facilities, providing the
generation interconnection required to connect generator output to the Transmission
Systems that, if destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable,
would result in the loss of the generation Facilities identified by any Generator Owner
as a result of its application of Attachment 1, criterion 2.1 or 2.3.
2.9. Each RAS or automated switching System that operates BES Elements, that, if
destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable, would cause one or
more Interconnection Reliability Operating Limits (IROLs) violations for failure to
operate as designed or cause a reduction in one or more IROLs if destroyed, degraded,
misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable.
2.10. Each system or group of Elements that performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system, without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more
implementing undervoltage load shedding (UVLS) or underfrequency load shedding
(UFLS) under a load shedding program that is subject to one or more requirements in
a NERC or regional reliability standard.
2.11. Each Control Center or backup Control Center, not already included in high impact
rating above, used to perform the functional obligations of the Generator Operator for
an aggregate highest rated net Real Power capability of the preceding 12 calendar
months equal to or exceeding 1500 MW in a single Interconnection.
2.12. Each Control Center or backup Control Center used to perform the functional
obligations of the Transmission Operator not included in high impact rating, above.
Page 11 of 12
Attachment 1
2.13. Each Control Center or backup Control Center, not already included in high impact
rating above, used to perform the functional obligations of the Balancing Authority for
generation equal to or greater than an aggregate of 1500 MW in a single
Interconnection.
3. Low impact rating
BCS not included in Sections 1 or 2 above that are associated with any of the following
assets and that meet the applicability qualifications in Section 4 - Applicability, part 4.2 –
Facilities, of this standard:
3.1. Control Centers and backup Control Centers.
3.2. Transmission stations and substations.
3.3. Generation resources.
3.4. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart Resources and
Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements.
3.5. RAS that support the reliable operation of the Bulk Electric System.
3.6. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability section 4.2.1
above.
Page 12 of 12
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-002-7.pdf ---

