--- START DOCUMENT: cip-005-7.pdf ---
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
2. Number: CIP-005-7
3. Purpose: To manage electronic access to BES Cyber Systems by specifying a
controlled Electronic Security Perimeter in support of protecting BES Cyber Systems
against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
Page 1 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-005-7:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters.
Page 2 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03.
6. Background: Standard CIP-005 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to
cyber security, which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber
Systems and require a minimum level of organizational, operational and procedural
controls to mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements. An
entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes,
but it must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident
response plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an approach
involving multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans, and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the
standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training
program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be
referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any
additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
Page 3 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented processes.
These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk
Electric System. A review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability
standards for UFLS program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of
300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of
systems to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this
concept from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk
Management Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately
based on impact and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used
in the “Applicability Systems” column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization processes.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial-up Connectivity – Only applies to high
impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial-up Connectivity.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity – Only
applies to high impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity.
This also excludes Cyber Assets in the BES Cyber System that cannot be directly
accessed through External Routable Connectivity.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized
as medium impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
Page 4 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at Control Centers – Only applies to
medium impact BES Cyber Systems located at a Control Center.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial-up Connectivity – Only applies to
medium impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial-up Connectivity.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity – Only
applies to medium impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable
Connectivity. This also excludes Cyber Assets in the BES Cyber System that
cannot be directly accessed through External Routable Connectivity.
• Protected Cyber Assets (PCA) – Applies to each Protected Cyber Asset
associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact
BES Cyber System.
• Electronic Access Points (EAP) – Applies at Electronic Access Points associated
with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber
System.
• Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access
Control System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or
medium impact BES Cyber System.
• Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced
high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples
may include, but are not limited to, firewalls, authentication servers, and log
monitoring and alerting systems.
Page 5 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-005-7 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-005-7 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-7 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their All applicable Cyber Assets connected to a An example of evidence may include, but
associated: network via a routable protocol shall reside is not limited to, a list of all ESPs with all
• PCA within a defined ESP. uniquely identifiable applicable Cyber
Assets connected via a routable protocol
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
within each ESP.
their associated:
• PCA
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems with All External Routable Connectivity must be An example of evidence may include, but
External Routable Connectivity and their through an identified Electronic Access is not limited to, network diagrams
associated: Point (EAP). showing all external routable
• PCA communication paths and the identified
EAPs.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
• PCA
1.3 Electronic Access Points for High Impact Require inbound and outbound access An example of evidence may include, but
BES Cyber Systems permissions, including the reason for is not limited to, a list of rules (firewall,
Electronic Access Points for Medium granting access, and deny all other access access control lists, etc.) that
Impact BES Cyber Systems by default. demonstrate that only permitted access
is allowed and that each access rule has a
documented reason.
Page 6 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-7 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems with Dial- Where technically feasible, perform An example of evidence may include, but
up Connectivity and their associated: authentication when establishing Dial-up is not limited to, a documented process
• PCA Connectivity with applicable Cyber Assets. that describes how the Responsible Entity
is providing authenticated access through
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
each dial-up connection.
Dial-up Connectivity and their associated:
• PCA
1.5 Electronic Access Points for High Impact Have one or more methods for detecting An example of evidence may include, but
BES Cyber Systems known or suspected malicious is not limited to, documentation that
Electronic Access Points for Medium communications for both inbound and malicious communications detection
Impact BES Cyber Systems at Control outbound communications. methods (e.g. intrusion detection system,
Centers application layer firewall, etc.) are
implemented.
Page 7 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts, where technically feasible, in CIP-005-7 Table R2 –Remote Access Management. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M2. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively address each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
005-7 Table R2 –Remote Access Management and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the
Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-7 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their For all Interactive Remote Access, utilize Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: an Intermediate System such that the are not limited to, network diagrams or
• PCA Cyber Asset initiating Interactive Remote architecture documents.
Access does not directly access an
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
applicable Cyber Asset.
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
• PCA
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their For all Interactive Remote Access An example of evidence may include, but
associated: sessions, utilize encryption that is not limited to, architecture documents
• PCA terminates at an Intermediate System. detailing where encryption initiates and
terminates.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
• PCA
Page 8 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-7 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Require multi-factor authentication for all An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Interactive Remote Access sessions. is not limited to, architecture documents
• PCA detailing the authentication factors used.
Examples of authenticators may include,
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
but are not limited to,
External Routable Connectivity and their
• Something the individual knows such
associated:
as passwords or PINs. This does not
• PCA
include User ID;
• Something the individual has such as
tokens, digital certificates, or smart
cards; or
• Something the individual is such as
fingerprints, iris scans, or other
biometric characteristics.
Page 9 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-7 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Have one or more methods for Examples of evidence may include, but
determining active vendor remote access are not limited to, documentation of the
their associated:
sessions (including Interactive Remote methods used to determine active
• PCA
Access and system-to-system remote vendor remote access (including
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
access). Interactive Remote Access and system-
with External Routable Connectivity
to-system remote access), such as:
and their associated:
• Methods for accessing logged or
• PCA
monitoring information to determine
active vendor remote access sessions;
• Methods for monitoring activity (e.g.
connection tables or rule hit counters
in a firewall, or user activity
monitoring) or open ports (e.g.
netstat or related commands to
display currently active ports) to
determine active system to system
remote access sessions; or
• Methods that control vendor
initiation of remote access such as
vendors calling and requesting a
second factor in order to initiate
remote access.
Page 10 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-7 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Have one or more method(s) to disable Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: active vendor remote access (including are not limited to, documentation of the
• PCA Interactive Remote Access and system- methods(s) used to disable active vendor
to-system remote access). remote access (including Interactive
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
Remote Access and system-to-system
External Routable Connectivity and their
remote access), such as:
associated:
• Methods to disable vendor
• PCA
remote access at the applicable
Electronic Access Point for system-
to-system remote access; or
• Methods to disable vendor
Interactive Remote Access at the
applicable Intermediate System.
Page 11 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-005-7 Table R3 –Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS and PACS. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M3. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively address each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
005-7 Table R3 – Vendor Remote Access Management and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-7 Table R3 – Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS and PACS
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 EACMS and PACS associated with High Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include, but
Impact BES Cyber Systems determine authenticated vendor- are not limited to, documentation of the
EACMS and PACS associated with initiated remote connections. methods used to determine
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with authenticated vendor-initiated remote
External Routable Connectivity connections, such as:
• Methods for accessing logged or
monitoring information to
determine authenticated vendor-
initiated remote connections.
3.2 EACMS and PACS associated with High Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include, but
Impact BES Cyber Systems terminate authenticated vendor-initiated are not limited to, documentation of the
EACMS and PACS associated with remote connections and control the methods(s) used to terminate
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with ability to reconnect. authenticated vendor-initiated remote
External Routable Connectivity connections to applicable
systems. Examples include terminating
an active vendor-initiated
shell/process/session or dropping an
active vendor-initiated connection in a
firewall. Methods to control the ability to
reconnect, if necessary, could
be: disabling an Active Directory account;
disabling a security token; restricting IP
addresses from vendor sources in a
firewall; or physically disconnecting a
network cable to prevent a reconnection.
Page 12 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated
by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of
monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable
Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to
provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-time period
since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 13 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
have a method for detecting document one or more
malicious communications for processes for CIP-005-6 Table
both inbound and outbound R1 – Electronic Security
communications. (1.5) Perimeter. (R1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
have all applicable Cyber
Assets connected to a network
via a routable protocol within
a defined Electronic Security
Perimeter (ESP). (1.1)
OR
External Routable Connectivity
through the ESP was not
through an identified EAP.
(1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
require inbound and outbound
access permissions and deny
all other access by default.
(1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
perform authentication when
establishing dial-up
connectivity with the
Page 14 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
applicable Cyber Assets, where
technically feasible. (1.4)
R2. The Responsible Entity does The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not have documented implement processes for one implement processes for two implement processes for three
processes for one or more of of the applicable items for of the applicable items for of the applicable items for
the applicable items for Requirement Parts 2.1 through Requirement Parts 2.1 through Requirement Parts 2.1 through
Requirement Parts 2.1 through 2.3. 2.3; 2.3;
2.3.
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did
not have either: one or more not have one or more
method(s) for determining method(s) for determining
active vendor remote access active vendor remote access
sessions (including Interactive sessions (including
Remote Access and system-to- Interactive Remote Access
system remote access) (2.4); and system-to-system
or one or more methods to remote access) (2.4) and one
disable active vendor remote or more methods to disable
access (including Interactive active vendor remote access
Remote Access and system-to- (including Interactive Remote
system remote access) Access and system-to-system
(2.5). remote access) (2.5).
R3. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity had The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
document one or more method(s) as required by Part implement processes for implement any processes for
processes for CIP-005-7 Table 3.1 for EACMS but did not either Part 3.1 or Part 3.2. (R3) CIP-005-7 Table R3 – Vendor
R3 – Vendor Remote Access have a method to determine Remote Access Management
OR
Management for EACMS and authenticated vendor-initiated for EACMS and PACS. (R3)
The Responsible Entity had
PACS. (R3) remote connections for PACS
OR
method(s) as required by Part
(3.1).
3.1 for PACS but did not have a
OR
method to determine
Page 15 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity had authenticated vendor-initiated The Responsible Entity did not
method(s) as required by Part remote connections for have any methods as required
3.2 for EACMS but did not EACMS (3.1). by Parts 3.1 and 3.2 (R3).
have a method to terminate
OR
authenticated vendor-initiated
The Responsible Entity had
remote connections for PACS
method(s) as required by Part
(3.2).
3.2 for PACS but did not have a
method to terminate
authenticated vendor-initiated
remote connections or control
the ability to reconnect for
EACMS (3.2).
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03
• CIP-005-7 Technical Rationale
Page 16 of 17
CIP-005-7 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Version History
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and to
bring the compliance elements into conformance
with the latest guidelines for developing
compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a responsible
entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated version number from -2 to -3 Approved
by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 12/30/10 Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Asset Update
identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP
standards and to
revise format to
use RBS Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-005-5.
6 07/20/17 Modified to address certain directives in FERC Revised
Order No. 829.
6 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
6 10/18/2018 FERC Order approving CIP-005-6. Docket No.
RM17-13-000.
7 08/01/2019 Modified to address directives in FERC Order No. Revised
850.
7 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
7 3/18/2021 FERC Order approving CIP-005-7. Docket No. RD21-
2-000
Page 17 of 17
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-005-7.pdf ---

