--- START DOCUMENT: cip-011-4.pdf ---
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Information Protection
2. Number: CIP-011-4
3. Purpose: To prevent unauthorized access to BES Cyber System Information (BCSI) by
specifying information protection requirements in support of protecting BES Cyber Systems
(BCS) against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric
System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional entity
or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load
shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity, without
human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including
the first interconnection point of the starting station service of the
next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
Page 1 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above are
those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this standard
where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of Facilities,
systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems and
equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity, without
human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements in a
NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including
the first interconnection point of the starting station service of the
next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-011-4:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security Perimeters
(ESP).
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and data
communication links, between the Cyber Systems providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or more
geographic locations.
Page 2 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant
to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not
included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber Systems
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the CIP-002
identification and categorization processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to define the
scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards” Implementation Plan.
Page 3 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented information protection program(s) for BCSI pertaining to
Applicable Systems identified in CIP-011-4 Table R1 – Information Protection Program that collectively includes each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-011-4 Table R1 – Information Protection Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M1. Evidence for the information protection program must include the applicable requirement parts in CIP-011-4 Table R1 –
Information Protection Program and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures
column of the table.
CIP-011-4 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Method(s) to identify BCSI. Examples of evidence may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
1. Electronic Access Control and
Monitoring Systems (EACMS); and • Documented method(s) to identify
BCSI from the entity’s information
2. Physical Access Control Systems
protection program; or
(PACS)
• Indications on information (e.g., labels
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
or classification) that identify BCSI as
1. EACMS; and
designated in the entity’s information
protection program; or
2. PACS
• Training materials that provide
Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI)
personnel with sufficient knowledge
supporting an Applicable System in this
to identify BCSI; or
Part
• Storage locations identified for
housing BCSI in the entity’s
information protection program.
1.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Method(s) to protect and securely Examples of evidence for on-premise BCSI
handle BCSI to mitigate risks of may include, but are not limited to, the
1. EACMS; and
compromising confidentiality. following:
2. PACS
• Procedures for protecting and
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
securely handling, which include
Page 4 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
CIP-011-4 Table R1 – Information Protection Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
topics such as storage, security
1. EACMS; and
during transit, and use of BCSI; or
2. PACS • Records indicating that BCSI is
handled in a manner consistent
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
with the entity’s documented
this Part
procedure(s).
Examples of evidence for off-premise BCSI
may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
• Implementation of electronic
technical method(s) to protect
electronic BCSI (e.g., data
masking, encryption, hashing,
tokenization, cipher, electronic
key management); or
• Implementation of physical
technical method(s) to protect
physical BCSI (e.g., physical lock
and key management, physical
badge management, biometrics,
alarm system); or
• Implementation of administrative
method(s) to protect BCSI (e.g.,
vendor service risk assessments,
business agreements).
Page 5 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-011-4 Table R2 –Reuse and Disposal. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations
Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-011-4 Table R2 –Reuse and Disposal and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-011-4 Table R2 –Reuse and Disposal
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
Methods to prevent the unauthorized
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Examples of evidence may include, but are
retrieval of BCSI from Applicable Systems
not limited to, the following:
1. EACMS; containing BCSI, prior to their disposal or
reuse (except for reuse within other • Records tracking sanitization actions
2. PACS; and
systems identified in the Applicable taken to prevent unauthorized retrieval
3. PCA Systems column). of BCSI such as clearing, purging, or
destroying; or
Medium impact BCS and their
associated: • Records tracking actions such as
encrypting, retaining in the Physical
1. EACMS;
Security Perimeter (PSP) or other
2. PACS; and
methods used to prevent unauthorized
3. PCA retrieval of BCSI.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
this Part
Page 6 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
B. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring and/or
enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in
their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period
of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is
shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide
other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last
audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of
time as part of an investigation:
• The applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard
for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the
time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
Page 7 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
Violation Severity Levels
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-011-4)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 N/A N/A The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity neither
implement one or more BCSI documented nor implemented one or
protection program(s). more BCSI protection program(s).
(Requirement R1) (Requirement R1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement at least one method to
identify BCSI. (Part 1.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement at least one method to
protect and securely handle BCSI.
(Part 1.2)
R2 N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity neither
did not include include disposal processes to documented nor implemented any
processes for reuse to prevent the unauthorized retrieval processes for applicable requirement
prevent the of BCSI from an Applicable System. parts in CIP-011-4 Table R2 –Reuse and
unauthorized retrieval (Part 2.1) Disposal. (Requirement R2)
of BCSI from an
Applicable System.
(Part 2.1)
Page 8 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
C. Regional Variances
None.
D. Interpretations
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-011-4 Technical Rationale
Page 9 of 10
CIP-011-4 — Cyber Security — Information Protection
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Developed to define the
Trustees. information protection
requirements in coordination
with other CIP standards and to
address the balance of the FERC
directives in its Order 706.
1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
011-1. (Order becomes effective on
2/3/14.)
2 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Addressed two FERC directives
Trustees. from Order No. 791 related to
identify, assess, and correct
language and communication
networks.
2 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Replaces the version adopted by
Trustees. the Board on 11/13/2014.
Revised version addresses
remaining directives from Order
No. 791 related to transient
devices and low impact BES
Cyber Systems.
2 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-
011-2. Docket No. RM15-14-000
3 8/12/21 Adopted by the NERC Board of Revised to enhance BES
Trustees reliability for entities to manage
their BCSI.
3 12/7/21 FERC Order issued approving CIP- “A Responsible Entity may elect
011-3 Docket No. RD21-6-000 to comply with the requirements
in CIP-004-7 and CIP-011-3
following their approval by the
applicable governmental
authority, but prior to their
Effective Date. In such a case,
the Responsible Entity shall
notify the applicable Regional
Entities of the date of
compliance with the CIP-004-7
and CIP-011-3 Reliability
Standards. Responsible Entities
must comply with CIP-004-6 and
CIP-011-2 until that date.”
Virtualization Modifications
4 5/9/2024 Approved by the NERC Board of
under Project 2016-02
Trustees.
Page 10 of 10
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-011-4.pdf ---

