--- START DOCUMENT: cip-003-11.pdf ---
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
2. Number: CIP-003-11
3. Purpose: To specify consistent and sustainable security management controls that
establish responsibility and accountability to protect BES Cyber Systems
(BCS) against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in
the Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
Page 1 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-003-11:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
Page 2 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between Cyber Systems providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or
more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates: See Implementation Plan for CIP-003-11.
Page 3 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager approval at least
once every 15 calendar months for one or more documented cyber security policies
that collectively address the following topics: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. For its high impact and medium impact BCS, if any:
1.1.1. Personnel and training (CIP-004);
1.1.2. Electronic Security Perimeters (CIP-005) including Interactive Remote
Access;
1.1.3. Physical security of BCS (CIP-006);
1.1.4. System security management (CIP-007);
1.1.5. Incident reporting and response planning (CIP-008);
1.1.6. Recovery plans for BCS (CIP-009);
1.1.7. Configuration change management and vulnerability assessments (CIP-
010);
1.1.8. Information protection (CIP-011); and
1.1.9. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
1.2. For its assets identified in CIP-002 containing low impact BCS, if any:
1.2.1. Cyber security awareness;
1.2.2. Physical security controls;
1.2.3. Electronic access controls;
1.2.4. Cyber Security Incident response;
1.2.5. Transient Cyber Assets (TCA) and Removable Media malicious code risk
mitigation; and
1.2.6. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
M1. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, policy documents; revision
history, records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management
system that indicate review of each cyber security policy at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager for each cyber
security policy.
R2. Each Responsible Entity with at least one asset identified in CIP-002 containing low
impact BCS shall implement one or more documented cyber security plan(s) for its
low impact BCS, and Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI) that supports a low impact BCS,
that include the sections in Attachment 1. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
Page 4 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Note: An inventory, list, or discrete identification of low impact BCS or their BES Cyber
Assets (BCA) is not required. Lists of authorized users are not required.
M2. Evidence shall include each of the documented cyber security plan(s) that collectively
include each of the sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation of the cyber security plan(s). Additional examples of evidence per
section are located in Attachment 2.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall identify a CIP Senior Manager by name and document
any change within 30 calendar days of the change. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated and approved
document from a high-level official designating the name of the individual identified
as the CIP Senior Manager.
R4. The Responsible Entity shall implement a documented process to delegate authority,
unless no delegations are used. Where allowed by the CIP Standards, the CIP Senior
Manager may delegate authority for specific actions to a delegate or delegates. These
delegations shall be documented, including the name or title of the delegate, the
specific actions delegated, and the date of the delegation; approved by the CIP Senior
Manager; and updated within 30 days of any change to the delegation. Delegation
changes do not need to be reinstated with a change to the delegator. [Violation Risk
Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M4. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated document,
approved by the CIP Senior Manager, listing individuals (by name or title) who are
delegated the authority to approve or authorize specifically identified items.
Page 5 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” means
NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing
compliance with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention periods identify the period of
time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance.
For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than
the time since the last audit, the Compliance Enforcement Authority may ask an
entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time
period since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its Compliance Enforcement Authority to retain specific
evidence for a longer period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the
time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The Compliance Enforcement Authority shall keep the last audit records and all
requested and submitted subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: “Compliance Monitoring and
Enforcement Program” or “CMEP” means, depending on the context (1) the NERC
Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program (Appendix 4C to the NERC Rules
of Procedure) or the Commission-approved program of a Regional Entity, as
applicable, or (2) the program, department or organization within NERC or a
Regional Entity that is responsible for performing compliance monitoring and
enforcement activities with respect to Registered Entities’ compliance with
Reliability Standards.
Page 6 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not address one of the nine address two of the nine topics address three of the nine address four or more of the
topics required by required by Requirement R1. topics required by nine topics required by
Requirement R1. (Part 1.1) (Part 1.1) Requirement R1. (Part 1.1) Requirement R1. (Part 1.1)
OR OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not complete its review of complete its review of the one complete its review of the one have any documented cyber
the one or more or more documented cyber or more documented cyber security policies for its high
documented cyber security security policies for its high security policies for its high impact and medium impact
policies for its high impact impact and medium impact impact and medium impact BCS as required by
and medium impact BCS as BCS as required by BCS as required by Requirement R1. (Part 1.1)
required by Requirement R1 Requirement R1 within 16 Requirement R1 within 17
OR
within 15 calendar months calendar months but did calendar months but did
but did complete this complete this review in less complete this review in less The Responsible Entity did not
review in less than or equal than or equal to 17 calendar than or equal to 18 calendar complete its review of the one
to 16 calendar months of months of the previous months of the previous or more documented cyber
the previous review. (Part review. (Part 1.1) review. (Part 1.1) security policies as required by
1.1) Requirement R1 within 18
OR OR
calendar months of the
OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not previous review.
The Responsible Entity did complete its approval of the complete its approval of the (Requirement R1)
not complete its approval of one or more documented one or more documented
OR
the one or more cyber security policies for its cyber security policies for its
documented cyber security high impact and medium high impact and medium The Responsible Entity did not
policies for its high impact impact BCS as required by impact BCS as required by complete its approval of the
and medium impact BCS as Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP one or more documented
required by Requirement R1 Senior Manager within 16 Senior Manager within 17 cyber security policies for its
by the CIP Senior Manager calendar months but did calendar months but did high impact and medium
Page 7 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
within 15 calendar months complete this approval in less complete this approval in less impact BCS as required by
but did complete this than or equal to 17 calendar than or equal to 18 calendar Requirement R1 by the CIP
approval in less than or months of the previous months of the previous Senior Manager within 18
equal to 16 calendar approval. (Part 1.1) approval. (Requirement R1) calendar months of the
months of the previous previous approval. (Part 1.1)
OR OR
approval. (Part 1.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
OR
documented one or more documented one or more The Responsible Entity did
The Responsible Entity cyber security policies for its cyber security policies for its not address four or more of
documented one or more assets identified in CIP-002 assets identified in CIP-002 the seven topics required by
cyber security policies for its containing low impact BCS, containing low impact BCS, Requirement R1. (Part 1.2)
assets identified in CIP-002 but did not address two of the but did not address three of
OR
containing low impact BCS, seven topics required by the seven topics required by
but did not address one of Requirement R1. (Part 1.2) Requirement R1. (Part 1.2) The Responsible Entity did not
the seven topics required by have any documented cyber
OR OR
Requirement R1. (Part 1.2) security policies for its assets
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not identified in CIP-002
OR
complete its review of the one complete its review of the one containing low impact BCS as
The Responsible Entity did or more documented cyber or more documented cyber required by Requirement R1.
not complete its review of security policies for its assets security policies for its assets (Part 1.2)
the one or more identified in CIP-002 identified in CIP-002
OR
documented cyber security containing low impact BCS as containing low impact BCS as
policies for its assets required by Requirement R1 required by Requirement R1 The Responsible Entity did not
identified in CIP-002 within 16 calendar months but within 17 calendar months but complete its approval of the
containing low impact BCS did complete this review in did complete this review in one or more documented
as required by Requirement less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18 cyber security policies for its
R1 within 15 calendar calendar months of the calendar months of the assets identified in CIP-002
months but did complete previous review. (Part 1.2) previous review. (Part 1.2) containing low impact BCS as
this review in less than or required by Requirement R1
OR OR
equal to 16 calendar by the CIP Senior Manager
within 18 calendar months of
Page 8 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
months of the previous The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not the previous approval. (Part
review. (Part 1.2) complete its approval of the complete its approval of the 1.2)
one or more documented one or more documented
OR
cyber security policies for its cyber security policies for its
The Responsible Entity did assets identified in CIP-002 assets identified in CIP-002
not complete its approval of containing low impact BCS as containing low impact BCS as
the one or more required by Requirement R1 required by Requirement R1
documented cyber security by the CIP Senior Manager by the CIP Senior Manager
policies for its assets within 16 calendar months but within 17 calendar months but
identified in CIP-002 did complete this approval in did complete this approval in
containing low impact BCS less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18
as required by Requirement calendar months of the calendar months of the
R1 by the CIP Senior previous approval. (Part 1.2) previous approval. (Part 1.2)
Manager within 15 calendar
months but did complete
this approval in less than or
equal to 16 calendar
months of the previous
approval. (Part 1.2)
R2 The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity failed The Responsible Entity failed The Responsible Entity failed
failed to document cyber to reinforce cyber security to implement the physical to document and implement
security awareness practices at least once every security controls according to one or more cyber security
according to Requirement 15 calendar months according Requirement R2, Attachment plan(s) according to
R2, Attachment 1, Section 1. to Requirement R2, 1, Section 2. (Requirement R2) Requirement R2, Attachment
(Requirement R2) Attachment 1, Section 1. 1. (Requirement R2)
OR
(Requirement R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity failed
OR
The Responsible Entity to permit only necessary
failed to document its cyber The Responsible Entity failed inbound and outbound
security plan(s) for to document physical security electronic access controls
Page 9 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
electronic access controls controls according to according to Requirement R2,
according to Requirement Requirement R2, Attachment Attachment 1, Section 3.1.
R2, Attachment 1, Section 3. 1, Section 2. (Requirement R2) (Requirement R2)
(Requirement R2)
OR OR
OR
The Responsible Entity failed The Responsible Entity failed
The Responsible Entity to document electronic access to test each Cyber Security
failed to document one or controls according to Incident response plan(s) at
more Cyber Security Requirement R2, Attachment least once every 36 calendar
Incident response plan(s) 1, Section 3. (Requirement R2) months according to
according to Requirement Requirement R2, Attachment
OR
R2, Attachment 1, Section 4. 1, Section 4. (Requirement R2)
(Requirement R2) The Responsible Entity failed
OR
to implement authentication
OR
for all Dial-up Connectivity The Responsible Entity failed
The Responsible Entity according to Requirement R2, to notify the Electricity
failed to update each Cyber Attachment 1, Section 3.2 Information Sharing and
Security Incident response (Requirement R2) Analysis Center (E-ISAC)
plan(s) within 180 days according to Requirement R2,
OR
according to Requirement Attachment 1, Section 4.
R2, Attachment 1, Section 4. The Responsible Entity failed (Requirement R2)
(Requirement R2) to include the process for
OR
identification, classification,
OR
and response to Cyber The Responsible Entity failed
The Responsible Entity Security Incidents according to to implement mitigation for
failed to manage its Requirement R2, Attachment the introduction of malicious
Transient Cyber Asset(s) 1, Section 4. (Requirement R2) code for Transient Cyber
according to Requirement Assets managed by the
OR
R2, Attachment 1, Section Responsible Entity according
The Responsible Entity failed
5.1. (Requirement R2) to Requirement R2,
to document the
Page 10 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
OR determination of whether an Attachment 1, Section 5.1.
identified Cyber Security (Requirement R2)
The Responsible Entity
Incident is a Reportable Cyber
failed to document the OR
Security Incident and
Removable Media section(s)
subsequent notification to the The Responsible Entity failed
according to Requirement
Electricity Information Sharing to implement mitigation for
R2, Attachment 1, Section
and Analysis Center (E-ISAC) the introduction of malicious
5.3. (Requirement R2)
according to Requirement R2, code for Transient Cyber
Attachment 1, Section 4. Assets managed by a party
(Requirement R2) other than the Responsible
Entity according to
OR
Requirement R2, Attachment
The Responsible Entity failed 1, Section 5.2. (Requirement
to document mitigation for R2)
the introduction of malicious
OR
code for Transient Cyber
Assets managed by the The Responsible Entity failed
Responsible Entity according to implement mitigation for
to Requirement R2, the threat of detected
Attachment 1, Sections 5.1 malicious code on the
and 5.3. (Requirement R2) Removable Media prior to
connecting Removable Media
OR
according to Requirement R2,
The Responsible Entity failed Attachment 1, Section 5.3.
to document mitigation for (Requirement R2)
the introduction of malicious
code for Transient Cyber
Assets managed by a party
other than the Responsible
Entity according to
Requirement R2, Attachment
Page 11 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
1, Section 5.2. (Requirement
R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity failed
to implement the Removable
Media section(s) according to
Requirement R2, Attachment
1, Section 5.3. (Requirement
R2)
The Responsible Entity did
R3 The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not identify, by name, a CIP
not document changes to document changes to the CIP document changes to the CIP
Senior Manager.
the CIP Senior Manager Senior Manager within 40 Senior Manager within 50
within 30 calendar days but calendar days but did calendar days but did OR
did document this change in document this change in less document this change in less The Responsible Entity did not
less than 40 calendar days than 50 calendar days of the than 60 calendar days of the document changes to the CIP
of the change. change. (Requirement R3) change. (Requirement R3) Senior Manager within 60
(Requirement R3) calendar days of the change.
(Requirement R3)
The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity does
R4
not document changes to not document changes to the not document changes to the not have a process to
the delegate within 30 delegate within 40 calendar delegate within 50 calendar delegate actions from the CIP
calendar days but did days but did document this days but did document this Senior Manager.
document this change in change in less than 50 change in less than 60 (Requirement R4)
less than 40 calendar days calendar days of the change. calendar days of the change.
OR
of the change. (Requirement R4) (Requirement R4)
The Responsible Entity did not
(Requirement R4)
document changes to the
Page 12 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-11)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
delegate within 60 calendar
days of the change.
(Requirement R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
•
Implementation Plan for Project 2023-04
•
CIP-003-11 Technical Rationale
Page 13 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and
to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or system
from service in order to perform testing, in
response to FERC order issued September 30,
2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to coordinate
with other CIP
standards and to revise
format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two FERC
directives from Order
No. 791 related to
identify, assess, and
correct language and
communication
networks.
6 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the version
adopted by the Board
on 11/13/2014. Revised
version addresses
remaining directives
from Order No. 791
related to transient
Page 14 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version Date Action Change Tracking
devices and low impact
BES Cyber Systems.
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
7 2/9/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revised to address FERC
Order No. 822 directives
regarding (1) the
definition of LERC and
(2) transient devices.
7 4/19/18 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-7.
Docket No. RM17-11-000
8 5/9/19 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Removed SPS
references.
Revised to address FERC
Order No. 843 regarding
mitigating the risk of
malicious code.
8 7/31/2019 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-8.
Docket No. RD19-5-000.
9 11/16/2022 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revisions to address
NERC Board Resolution
and the Supply Chain
Report
9 3/16/2023 FERC Order issued approving CIP-003-9.
Docket No. RD23-3-000.
10 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modifications made by
Project 2016-02
11 12/10/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees Modifications made by
Project 2023-04
Page 15 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Attachment 1
Required Sections for Cyber Security Plan(s)
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in the cyber security
plan(s) required under Requirement R2.
Responsible Entities with multiple-impact BCS ratings can utilize policies, procedures, and
processes for their high or medium impact BCS including any supporting SCI to fulfill the
sections for the development of low impact cyber security plan(s). Each Responsible Entity can
develop a cyber security plan(s) either by individual asset or groups of assets.
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: Each Responsible Entity shall reinforce, at least once
every 15 calendar months, cyber security practices (which may include associated
physical security practices).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Each Responsible Entity shall control physical access,
based on need, as determined by the Responsible Entity, to (1) the asset or the
locations of the low impact BCS within the asset, and (2) the Cyber Asset(s) or Virtual
Cyber Asset (VCA), as specified by the Responsible Entity, that provide electronic
access control(s) implemented for Section 3.1.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: Each Responsible Entity shall control electronic access as
outlined below.
3.1 For each asset containing low impact BCS identified pursuant to CIP-002 and
for SCI that supports a low impact BCS, if any, where electronic access is:
i. Between:
• a low impact BCS; or
• an SCI that supports a low impact BCS
and a Cyber System(s) outside the asset containing:
• the low impact BCS(s); or
• the SCI that supports a low impact BCS;
ii. using a routable protocol when entering or leaving the asset
containing the low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS;
and
iii. not used for time-sensitive communications of Protection Systems;
the Responsible Entity shall implement one or more controls, where Section
3.1. Parts (i), (ii), and (iii) are met, that:
3.1.1 Permit only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access
as determined by the Responsible Entity;
3.1.2 Detect known or suspected malicious communications for
Page 16 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
both inbound and outbound electronic access;
3.1.3 Authenticate each user prior to permitting access to a
network(s) containing low impact BCS or SCI that supports a
low impact BCS, through which user-initiated electronic
access applicable to Section 3.1 is subsequently permitted;
3.1.4 Protect user authentication information for user-initiated
electronic access applicable to Section 3.1.3 while in transit
between the Cyber System(s) outside the asset containing
low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS and
• the authentication system used to meet Section 3.1.3,
or
• the asset containing low impact BCS or SCI that
supports a low impact BCS;
3.1.5 Include one or more method(s) for determining vendor
electronic access, where vendor electronic access is
permitted; and
3.1.6 Include one or more method(s) for disabling vendor
electronic access, where vendor electronic access is
permitted.
3.2 For each asset containing low impact BCS identified pursuant to CIP-002 and
for SCI that supports a low impact BCS, if any, the Responsible Entity shall
implement one or more control(s) that authenticate all Dial-up Connectivity,
if any, that provides access to low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low
impact BCS, per system capability.
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more
Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), either by asset or group of assets, which
shall include:
4.1 Identification, classification, and response to Cyber Security Incidents;
4.2 Determination of whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and subsequent notification to the
Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC), unless
prohibited by law;
4.3 Identification of the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security Incident
response by groups or individuals;
4.4 Incident handling for Cyber Security Incidents;
4.5 Testing the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) at least once every 36
calendar months by: (1) responding to an actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; (2) using a drill or tabletop exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Page 17 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Incident; or (3) using an operational exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; and
4.6 Updating the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), if needed, within 180
calendar days after completion of a Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
test or actual Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
Section 5. TCA and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation: Each Responsible Entity
shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or more plan(s)
to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of the introduction of malicious code
to low impact BCS, through the use of TCA or Removable Media. The plan(s) shall
include:
5.1 For TCA managed by the Responsible Entity, if any, the use of one or a
combination of the following in an ongoing or on-demand manner (per TCA
capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
5.2 For TCA managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity, if any:
5.2.1 Use one or a combination of the following prior to connecting (per
TCA capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
• Review of other method(s) to mitigate the risk of introduction
of malicious code.
5.2.2 For any method used pursuant to 5.2.1, Responsible Entities shall
determine whether any additional mitigation actions are necessary
and implement such actions prior to connecting the TCA.
5.3 For Removable Media, the use of each of the following:
5.3.1 Method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media using a
Cyber Asset or VCA other than a BCS or SCI that supports a low impact
BCS; and
5.3.2 Mitigation of the threat of detected malicious code on the Removable
Media prior to connecting Removable Media to a low impact BCS or
SCI that supports a low impact BCS.
Page 18 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Cyber Security Plan(s)
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: An example of evidence for Section 1 may include, but is
not limited to, documentation that the reinforcement of cyber security practices
occurred at least once every 15 calendar months. The evidence could be
documentation through one or more of the following methods:
• Direct communications (for example, e-mails, memos, or computer-based
training);
• Indirect communications (for example, posters, intranet, or brochures); or
• Management support and reinforcement (for example, presentations or
meetings).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 2 may include, but are
not limited to:
• Documentation of the selected access control(s) (e.g., card key, locks, perimeter
controls), monitoring controls (e.g., alarm systems, human observation), or other
operational, procedural, or technical physical security controls that control
physical access to both:
a. The asset, if any, or the locations of the low impact BCS within the asset; and
b. The Cyber System(s) specified by the Responsible Entity that provide(s)
electronic access controls implemented for Attachment 1, Section 3.1.1, if
any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 3 may include, but are
not limited to:
1. For Section 3.1.1, documentation showing the permittance of only inbound and
outbound electronic access, where electronic access meets Section 3.1, Parts (i),
(ii), and (iii), that the Responsible Entity deems necessary, such as:
• Representative diagrams that illustrate control of inbound and outbound
communication(s) between the low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low
impact BCS and a Cyber System outside the asset containing low impact
BCS.
• Lists of implemented electronic access controls (e.g., access control lists
restricting IP addresses, ports, or services; implementing unidirectional
gateways); or
• Original equipment manufacturer (OEM) specification sheets that provide
rationale around necessary electronic access.
Page 19 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
2. For Section 3.1.2, documentation showing the ability to detect known or
suspected malicious communications for both inbound and outbound electronic
access, where electronic access meets Section 3.1, Parts (i), (ii), and (iii), such as:
• Anti-malware technologies;
• Intrusion detection system (IDS)/intrusion prevention system (IPS);
• Monitor or alert for changes to communication baselines;
• Logging and alerting configuration for security incident and event
management (SIEM) systems or other event correlation systems;
• Automated or manual log reviews;
• Alerting; or
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
3. For Section 3.1.3, documentation showing the ability to authenticate each user
prior to permitting access to a network(s) containing low impact BCS or SCI
that supports a low impact BCS through which user-initiated electronic access
applicable to Section 3.1 is subsequently permitted, such as:
• Authentication mechanism(s) including, but not limited to:
■ Utilization of public key infrastructure (PKI), lightweight directory
access protocol (LDAP), remote authentication dial-in user service
(RADIUS), and/or similar implemented solutions; or
■ Enforcement of multi-factor authentication (MFA).
• Virtual private network (VPN) configuration(s) with logs demonstrating
enforcement of username and password parameters;
• Terminal server, jump server, access control device, or an Intermediate
System also used with a High or Medium Impact BCS; or
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
4. For Section 3.1.4, documentation showing the ability to protect user
authentication information for user-initiated electronic access applicable to
Section 3.1.3 while in transit between the Cyber System outside the asset
containing low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS and
• The authentication system used to meet Section 3.1.3, or
• The asset containing low impact BCS or SCI that supports a low impact BCS,
such as protection mechanism(s) including, but not limited to:
• Implementation of an encrypted protocol or service (hypertext transfer
protocol secure (HTTPS), secure shell (SSH), etc.);
• Implementation of an IPsec or secure sockets layer (SSL) VPN; or
Page 20 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
5. For Section 3.1.5 documentation showing one or more methods for determining
vendor electronic access, where vendor electronic access is permitted and
electronic access meets Section 3.1, Parts (i), (ii), and (iii), such as:
• Steps to preauthorize access;
• Alerts generated by vendor log on;
• Session monitoring;
• Security information management logging alerts;
• Time-of-need session initiation;
• Session recording;
• System logs; or
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
6. For Section 3.1.6, documentation showing one or more methods for disabling
vendor electronic access, where vendor electronic access is permitted and
electronic access meets Section 3.1, Parts (i), (ii), and (iii), such as:
• Disabling vendor electronic access user or system accounts;
• Disabling inbound and/or outbound hardware or software ports, services,
or access permissions on applications, firewall, IDS/IPS, router, switch,
VPN, remote desktop, remote control, or other hardware or software
used for providing vendor electronic access;
• Disabling communications protocols (such as IP) used for systems which
establish and/or maintain vendor electronic access;
• Removing physical layer connectivity (e.g., disconnect an Ethernet cable,
power down equipment);
• Administrative control documentation listing the methods, steps, or
systems used to disable vendor electronic access; or
• Other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
7. For Section 3.2, documentation of authentication for Dial-up Connectivity (e.g.,
dial out only to a preprogrammed number to deliver data, dial-back modems,
modems that must be remotely controlled by the control center or control room,
or access control on the BCS).
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: An example of evidence for Section 4 may include,
but is not limited to, dated documentation, such as policies, procedures, or process
documents of one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) developed
either by asset or group of assets that include the following processes:
Page 21 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
1. to identify, classify, and respond to Cyber Security Incidents; to determine
whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident and for notifying the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(E-ISAC);
2. to identify and document the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security
Incident response by groups or individuals (e.g., initiating, documenting,
monitoring, reporting, etc.);
3. for incident handling of a Cyber Security Incident (e.g., containment, eradication,
or recovery/incident resolution);
4. for testing the plan(s) along with the dated documentation that a test has been
completed at least once every 36 calendar months; and
5. to update, as needed, Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) within 180
calendar days after completion of a test or actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident.
Section 5. TCA and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation:
1. Examples of evidence for Section 5.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern
updates, application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication,
or other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a TCA does
not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the introduction of
malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the vendor or
Responsible Entity that identifies that the TCA does not have the capability.
2. Examples of evidence for Section 5.2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or
procedures that document a review of the installed antivirus update level;
memoranda, electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from
the party other than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update
process, the use of application whitelisting, use of system hardening performed
by the party other than the Responsible Entity; evidence from change
management systems, electronic mail or contracts that identifies the
Responsible Entity’s acceptance that the practices of the party other than the
Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other method(s) to
mitigate malicious code for TCA managed by a party other than the Responsible
Entity. If a TCA does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the
introduction of malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the
Responsible Entity or the party other than the Responsible Entity that identifies
that the TCA does not have the capability.
Page 22 of 23
CIP-003-11 - Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Examples of evidence for Attachment 1, Section 5.2.2 may include, but are not
limited to, documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or
contracts that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigation is
necessary and has been implemented prior to connecting the TCA managed by a
party other than the Responsible Entity.
3. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to detect malicious code such as
results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on-demand
scanning. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.2 may include, but are not limited
to, documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating the threat of
detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the method(s)
used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and the
mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or documented
confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed to be free of
malicious code.
Page 23 of 23
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-003-11.pdf ---

