--- START DOCUMENT: cip-003-9.pdf ---
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
2. Number: CIP‐003‐9
3. Purpose: To specify consistent and sustainable security management controls that
establish responsibility and accountability to protect BES Cyber Systems
against compromise that could lead to misoperation or instability in the
Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
1
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP‐003‐9:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
2
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESPs).
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates: See Implementation Plan for CIP‐003‐9.
3
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager approval at least
once every 15 calendar months for one or more documented cyber security policies
that collectively address the following topics: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. For its high impact and medium impact BES Cyber Systems, if any:
1.1.1. Personnel and training (CIP‐004);
1.1.2. Electronic Security Perimeters (CIP‐005) including Interactive Remote
Access;
1.1.3. Physical security of BES Cyber Systems (CIP‐006);
1.1.4. System security management (CIP‐007);
1.1.5. Incident reporting and response planning (CIP‐008);
1.1.6. Recovery plans for BES Cyber Systems (CIP‐009);
1.1.7. Configuration change management and vulnerability assessments (CIP‐
010);
1.1.8. Information protection (CIP‐011); and
1.1.9. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
1.2. For its assets identified in CIP‐002 containing low impact BES Cyber Systems, if
any:
1.2.1. Cyber security awareness;
1.2.2. Physical security controls;
1.2.3. Electronic access controls;
1.2.4. Cyber Security Incident response;
1.2.5. Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media malicious code risk
mitigation;
1.2.6. Vendor electronic remote access security controls; and
1.2.7. Declaring and responding to CIP Exceptional Circumstances.
M1. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, policy documents; revision
history, records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management
system that indicate review of each cyber security policy at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager for each cyber
security policy.
R2. Each Responsible Entity with at least one asset identified in CIP‐002 containing low
impact BES Cyber Systems shall implement one or more documented cyber security
4
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
plan(s) for its low impact BES Cyber Systems that include the sections in Attachment 1.
[Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
Note: An inventory, list, or discrete identification of low impact BES Cyber Systems or
their BES Cyber Assets is not required. Lists of authorized users are not required.
M2. Evidence shall include each of the documented cyber security plan(s) that collectively
include each of the sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation of the cyber security plan(s). Additional examples of evidence per
section are located in Attachment 2.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall identify a CIP Senior Manager by name and document
any change within 30 calendar days of the change. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated and approved
document from a high level official designating the name of the individual identified as
the CIP Senior Manager.
R4. The Responsible Entity shall implement a documented process to delegate authority,
unless no delegations are used. Where allowed by the CIP Standards, the CIP Senior
Manager may delegate authority for specific actions to a delegate or delegates. These
delegations shall be documented, including the name or title of the delegate, the
specific actions delegated, and the date of the delegation; approved by the CIP Senior
Manager; and updated within 30 days of any change to the delegation. Delegation
changes do not need to be reinstated with a change to the delegator. [Violation Risk
Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M4. An example of evidence may include, but is not limited to, a dated document,
approved by the CIP Senior Manager, listing individuals (by name or title) who are
delegated the authority to approve or authorize specifically identified items.
5
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure,
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity in
their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance with the NERC
Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention periods identify the period of
time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance.
For instances where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than
the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence
to show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of
time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non‐compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non‐compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time
specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records, and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
6
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Operations Medium The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning documented and documented and documented and documented and
implemented one or implemented one or implemented one or implemented one or
more cyber security more cyber security more cyber security more cyber security
policies for its high policies for its high policies for its high policies for its high
impact and medium impact and medium impact and medium impact and medium
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber
Systems, but did not Systems, but did not Systems, but did not Systems, but did not
address one of the nine address two of the nine address three of the address four or more of
topics required by R1. topics required by R1. nine topics required by the nine topics required
(R1.1) (R1.1) R1. (R1.1) by R1. (R1.1)
OR OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
did not complete its did not complete its did not complete its did not have any
review of the one or review of the one or review of the one or documented cyber
more documented cyber more documented cyber more documented cyber security policies for its
security policies for its security policies for its security policies for its high impact and medium
high impact and medium high impact and medium high impact and medium impact BES Cyber
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber Systems as required by
Systems as required by Systems as required by Systems as required by R1. (R1.1)
R1 within 15 calendar R1 within 16 calendar R1 within 17 calendar
OR
months but did months but did months but did
The Responsible Entity
complete this review in complete this review in complete this review in
did not complete its
less than or equal to 16 less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18
review of the one or
calendar months of the calendar months of the calendar months of the
more documented
cyber security policies
8
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
previous review. previous review. previous review. as required by R1
(R1.1) (R1.1) (R1.1) within 18 calendar
months of the previous
OR OR OR
review. (R1)
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
OR
did not complete its did not complete its did not complete its
approval of the one or approval of the one or approval of the one or The Responsible Entity
more documented cyber more documented cyber more documented cyber did not complete its
security policies for its security policies for its security policies for its approval of the one or
high impact and high impact and high impact and more documented cyber
medium impact BES medium impact BES medium impact BES security policies for its
Cyber Systems as Cyber Systems as Cyber Systems as high impact and
required by R1 by the required by R1 by the required by R1 by the medium impact BES
CIP Senior Manager CIP Senior Manager CIP Senior Manager Cyber Systems as
within 15 calendar within 16 calendar within 17 calendar required by R1 by the
months but did months but did months but did CIP Senior Manager
complete this approval complete this approval complete this approval within 18 calendar
in less than or equal to in less than or equal to in less than or equal to months of the previous
16 calendar months of 17 calendar months of 18 calendar months of approval. (R1.1)
the previous approval. the previous approval. the previous approval.
OR
(R1.1) (R1.1) (R1)
The Responsible Entity
OR OR OR
documented one or
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity more cyber security
policies for its assets
documented one or documented one or documented one or
identified in CIP‐002
more cyber security more cyber security more cyber security
containing low impact
policies for its assets policies for its assets policies for its assets
BES Cyber Systems,
identified in CIP‐002 identified in CIP‐002 identified in CIP‐002
but did not address
containing low impact containing low impact containing low impact
9
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
BES Cyber Systems, but BES Cyber Systems, but BES Cyber Systems, but four or more of the
did not address one of did not address two of did not address three of seven topics required
the seven topics the seven topics the seven topics by R1. (R1.2)
required by R1. (R1.2) required by R1. (R1.2) required by R1. (R1.2)
OR
OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not have any
did not complete its did not complete its did not complete its documented cyber
review of the one or review of the one or review of the one or security policies for its
more documented cyber more documented cyber more documented cyber assets identified in CIP‐
security policies for its security policies for its security policies for its 002 containing low
assets identified in CIP‐ assets identified in CIP‐ assets identified in CIP‐ impact BES Cyber
002 containing low 002 containing low 002 containing low Systems as required by
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber R1. (R1.2)
Systems as required by Systems as required by Systems as required by
OR
Requirement R1 within Requirement R1 within R1 within 17 calendar
The Responsible Entity
15 calendar months but 16 calendar months but months but did
did not complete its
did complete this review did complete this review complete this review in
approval of the one or
in less than or equal to in less than or equal to less than or equal to 18
more documented cyber
16 calendar months of 17 calendar months of calendar months of the
security policies for its
the previous review. the previous review. previous review. (R1.2)
assets identified in CIP‐
(R1.2) (R1.2)
OR
002 containing low
OR OR
The Responsible Entity impact BES Cyber
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not complete its Systems as required by
Requirement R1 by the
did not complete its did not complete its approval of the one or
CIP Senior Manager
approval of the one or approval of the one or more documented
within 18 calendar
more documented more documented
months of
10
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
cyber security policies cyber security policies cyber security policies the previous approval.
for its assets identified for its assets identified for its assets identified (R1.2)
in CIP‐002 containing in CIP‐002 containing in CIP‐002 containing
low impact BES Cyber low impact BES Cyber low impact BES Cyber
Systems as required by Systems as required by Systems as required by
Requirement R1 by the Requirement R1 by the Requirement R1 by the
CIP Senior Manager CIP Senior Manager CIP Senior Manager
within 15 calendar within 16 calendar within 17 calendar
months but did months but did months but did
complete this approval complete this approval complete this approval
in less than or equal to in less than or equal to in less than or equal to
16 calendar months of 17 calendar months of 18 calendar months of
the previous approval. the previous approval. the previous approval.
(R1.2) (R1.2) (R1.2)
R2 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning documented its cyber documented its cyber documented the failed to document and
security plan(s) for its security plan(s) for its physical access controls implement one or more
assets containing low assets containing low for its assets containing cyber security plan(s) for
impact BES Cyber impact BES Cyber low impact BES Cyber its assets containing low
Systems, but failed to Systems, but failed to Systems, but failed to impact BES Cyber
document cyber security reinforce cyber security implement the physical Systems according to
awareness according to practices at least once security controls Requirement R2,
Requirement R2, every 15 calendar according to Attachment 1. (R2)
Attachment 1, Section months according to Requirement R2,
1. (R2) Requirement R2, Attachment 1, Section
2. (R2)
OR
11
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity Attachment 1, Section OR
implemented electronic 1. (R2)
The Responsible Entity
access controls but
OR documented its cyber
failed to document its
security plan(s) for
The Responsible Entity
cyber security plan(s) for
electronic access
documented its cyber
electronic access
controls for its assets
security plan(s) for its
controls according to
containing low impact
assets containing low
Requirement R2,
BES Cyber Systems, but
impact BES Cyber
Attachment 1, Section
failed to permit only
Systems, but failed to
3. (R2)
necessary inbound and
document physical
OR outbound electronic
security controls
The Responsible Entity according to access controls
documented its cyber Requirement R2, according to
security plan(s) for its Attachment 1, Section Requirement R2,
assets containing low 2. (R2) Attachment 1, Section
impact BES Cyber 3.1. (R2)
OR
Systems, but failed to OR
The Responsible Entity
document one or more
The Responsible Entity
documented its cyber
Cyber Security Incident
documented one or
security plan(s) for its
response plan(s)
more Cyber Security
assets containing low
according to
Incident response
impact BES Cyber
Requirement R2,
plan(s) within its cyber
Systems, but failed to
Attachment 1, Section
security plan(s) for its
document electronic
4. (R2)
assets containing low
access controls
OR impact BES Cyber
according to
The Responsible Entity Requirement R2, Systems, but failed to
documented one or Attachment 1, Section test each Cyber
3. (R2)
12
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
more Cyber Security OR Security Incident
Incident response response plan(s) at least
The Responsible Entity
plan(s) within its cyber once every 36 calendar
documented its cyber
security plan(s) for its months according to
security plan(s) for
assets containing low Requirement R2,
electronic access
impact BES Cyber Attachment 1, Section
controls but failed to
Systems, but failed to 4. (R2)
implement
update each Cyber
authentication for all OR
Security Incident
Dial‐up Connectivity that The Responsible Entity
response plan(s) within
provides access to low documented the
180 days according to
impact BES Cyber determination of
Requirement R2,
System(s), per Cyber whether an identified
Attachment 1, Section
Asset capability Cyber Security Incident
4. (R2)
according to is a Reportable Cyber
OR Requirement R2, Security Incident, but
The Responsible Entity Attachment 1, Section failed to notify the
documented its plan(s) 3.2 (R2) Electricity Information
for Transient Cyber OR Sharing and Analysis
Assets and Removable Center (E‐ISAC)
The Responsible Entity
Media, but failed to according to
documented one or
manage its Transient Requirement R2,
more incident response
Cyber Asset(s) according Attachment 1, Section
plan(s) within its cyber
to Requirement R2, 4. (R2)
security plan(s) for its
Attachment 1, Section
assets containing low OR
5.1. (R2)
impact BES Cyber
The Responsible Entity
OR Systems, but failed to
documented its
include the process for
13
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity identification, plan(s) for Transient
documented its plan(s) classification, and Cyber Assets and
for Transient Cyber response to Cyber Removable Media, but
Assets, but failed to Security Incidents failed to implement
document the according to mitigation for the
Removable Media Requirement R2, introduction of
section(s) according to Attachment 1, Section malicious code for
Requirement R2, 4. (R2) Transient Cyber Assets
Attachment 1, Section managed by the
OR
5.3. (R2) Responsible Entity
The Responsible Entity
according to
OR
documented its cyber
Requirement R2,
The Responsible Entity security plan(s) for its
Attachment 1, Section
implemented vendor assets containing low
5.1. (R2)
electronic remote access impact BES Cyber
OR
security controls but Systems, but failed to
failed to document its document the The Responsible Entity
cyber security process determination of documented its plan(s)
for vendor electronic whether an identified for Transient Cyber
remote access security Cyber Security Incident Assets and Removable
controls according to is a Reportable Cyber Media, but failed to
Requirement R2, Security Incident and implement mitigation
Attachment 1, Section subsequent notification for the introduction of
6. (R2) to the Electricity malicious code for
Information Sharing and Transient Cyber Assets
Analysis Center (E‐ISAC) managed by a party
according to other than the
Responsible Entity
14
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Requirement R2, according to
Attachment 1, Section Requirement R2,
4. (R2) Attachment 1, Section
5.2. (R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity OR
documented its plan(s) The Responsible Entity
for Transient Cyber documented its plan(s)
Assets and Removable for Transient Cyber
Media, but failed to Assets and Removable
document mitigation for Media, but failed to
the introduction of implement mitigation
malicious code for for the threat of
Transient Cyber Assets detected malicious code
managed by the on the Removable
Responsible Entity Media prior to
according to connecting Removable
Requirement R2, Media to a low impact
Attachment 1, BES Cyber System
Sections 5.1 and 5.3. according to
(R2) Requirement R2,
Attachment 1, Section
OR
5.3. (R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
documented its plan(s) The Responsible Entity
for Transient Cyber failed to document and
Assets and Removable implement its cyber
Media, but failed to security process for
document vendor electronic
15
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
mitigation for the remote access security
introduction of controls according to
malicious code for Requirement R2,
Transient Cyber Assets Attachment 1, Section
managed by a party 6. (R2)
other than the
Responsible Entity
according to
Requirement R2,
Attachment 1, Section
5.2. (R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
documented its plan(s)
for Transient Cyber
Assets and Removable
Media, but failed to
implement the
Removable Media
section(s) according to
Requirement R2,
Attachment 1, Section
5.3. (R2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
documented its cyber
security process for
vendor electronic
16
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
remote access security
controls, but failed to
implement vendor
electronic remote access
security controls
according to
Requirement R2,
Attachment 1, Section
6. (R2)
R3 Operations Medium The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has identified by name a has identified by name a has identified by name a has not identified, by
CIP Senior Manager, but CIP Senior Manager, but CIP Senior Manager, but name, a CIP Senior
did not document did not document did not document Manager.
changes to the CIP changes to the CIP changes to the CIP
OR
Senior Manager within Senior Manager within Senior Manager within
The Responsible Entity
30 calendar days but did 40 calendar days but did 50 calendar days but did
has identified by name a
document this change in document this change in document this change in
CIP Senior Manager, but
less than 40 calendar less than 50 calendar less than 60 calendar
did not document
days of the change. (R3) days of the change. (R3) days of the change. (R3)
changes to the CIP
Senior Manager within
60 calendar days of the
change. (R3)
R4 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has identified a delegate has identified a delegate has identified a delegate has used delegated
by name, title, date of by name, title, date of by name, title, date of authority for actions
delegation, and delegation, and delegation, and where allowed by the
CIP Standards, but
17
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-003-9)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
specific actions specific actions specific actions does not have a
delegated, but did not delegated, but did not delegated, but did not process to delegate
document changes to document changes to document changes to actions from the CIP
the delegate within 30 the delegate within 40 the delegate within 50 Senior Manager. (R4)
calendar days but did calendar days but did calendar days but did
OR
document this change in document this change in document this change in
The Responsible Entity
less than 40 calendar less than 50 calendar less than 60 calendar
has identified a delegate
days of the change. (R4) days of the change. (R4) days of the change. (R4)
by name, title, date of
delegation, and specific
actions delegated, but
did not document
changes to the delegate
within 60 calendar days
of the change. (R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
18
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and
to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from ‐2 to ‐3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or system
from service in order to perform testing, in
response to FERC order issued September 30,
2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with other
CIP standards and to
revise format to use
RBS Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two FERC
directives from
19
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version Date Action Change Tracking
Order No. 791
related to identify,
assess, and correct
language and
communication
networks.
6 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the version
adopted by the Board
on 11/13/2014.
Revised version
addresses remaining
directives from Order
No. 791 related to
transient devices and
low impact BES Cyber
Systems.
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐6.
Docket No. RM15‐14‐000
7 2/9/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revised to address
FERC Order No. 822
directives regarding
(1) the definition of
LERC and (2)
transient devices.
7 4/19/18 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐7.
Docket No. RM17‐11‐000
8 5/9/19 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Removed SPS
references.
Revised to address
FERC Order No. 843
regarding mitigating
the risk of malicious
code.
8 7/31/2019 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐8.
Docket No. RD19‐5‐000.
20
CIP‐003‐9 ‐ Cyber Security — Security Management Controls
Version Date Act Change Tracking
ion
9 11/16/2022 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Revisions to address
NERC Board Resolution
and the Supply Chain
Report
9 3/16/2023 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐003‐9.
Docket No. RD23‐3‐000.
21
Attachment 1
Attachment 1
Required Sections for Cyber Security Plan(s) for Assets
Containing Low Impact BES Cyber Systems
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in the cyber security
plan(s) required under Requirement R2.
Responsible Entities with multiple‐impact BES Cyber Systems ratings can utilize policies,
procedures, and processes for their high or medium impact BES Cyber Systems to fulfill the
sections for the development of low impact cyber security plan(s). Each Responsible Entity can
develop a cyber security plan(s) either by individual asset or groups of assets.
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: Each Responsible Entity shall reinforce, at least once
every 15 calendar months, cyber security practices (which may include associated
physical security practices).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Each Responsible Entity shall control physical access,
based on need as determined by the Responsible Entity, to (1) the asset or the
locations of the low impact BES Cyber Systems within the asset, and (2) the Cyber
Asset(s), as specified by the Responsible Entity, that provide electronic access
control(s) implemented for Section 3.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: For each asset containing low impact BES Cyber
System(s) identified pursuant to CIP‐002, the Responsible Entity shall implement
electronic access controls to:
3.1 Permit only necessary inbound and outbound electronic access as
determined by the Responsible Entity for any communications that are:
i. between a low impact BES Cyber System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside
the asset containing low impact BES Cyber System(s);
ii. using a routable protocol when entering or leaving the asset containing
the low impact BES Cyber System(s); and
iii. not used for time‐sensitive protection or control functions between
intelligent electronic devices (e.g., communications using protocol IEC TR‐
61850‐90‐5 R‐GOOSE).
3.2 Authenticate all Dial‐up Connectivity, if any, that provides access to low
impact BES Cyber System(s), per Cyber Asset capability.
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more
Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), either by asset or group of assets, which
shall include:
4.1 Identification, classification, and response to Cyber Security Incidents;
22
Attachment 1
4.2 Determination of whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and subsequent notification to the
Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E‐ISAC), unless
prohibited by law;
4.3 Identification of the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security Incident
response by groups or individuals;
4.4 Incident handling for Cyber Security Incidents;
4.5 Testing the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) at least once every 36
calendar months by: (1) responding to an actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; (2) using a drill or tabletop exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; or (3) using an operational exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; and
4.6 Updating the Cyber Security Incident response plan(s), if needed, within 180
calendar days after completion of a Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
test or actual Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
Section 5. Transient Cyber Asset and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation: Each
Responsible Entity shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances,
one or more plan(s) to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of the
introduction of malicious code to low impact BES Cyber Systems through the use of
Transient Cyber Assets or Removable Media. The plan(s) shall include:
5.1 For Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by the Responsible Entity, if any, the
use of one or a combination of the following in an ongoing or on‐demand
manner (per Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
5.2 For Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a party other than the Responsible
Entity, if any:
5.2.1 Use one or a combination of the following prior to connecting the
Transient Cyber Asset to a low impact BES Cyber System (per
Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review use of live operating system and software executable only
from read‐only media;
23
Attachment 1
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
5.2.2 For any method used pursuant to 5.2.1, Responsible Entities shall
determine whether any additional mitigation actions are necessary
and implement such actions prior to connecting the Transient Cyber
Asset.
5.3 For Removable Media, the use of each of the following:
5.3.1 Method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media using a
Cyber Asset other than a BES Cyber System; and
5.3.2 Mitigation of the threat of detected malicious code on the Removable
Media prior to connecting Removable Media to a low impact BES
Cyber System.
Section 6. Vendor Electronic Remote Access Security Controls: For assets containing low impact
BES Cyber System(s) identified pursuant to CIP‐002, that allow vendor electronic
remote access, the Responsible Entity shall implement a process to mitigate risks
associated with vendor electronic remote access, where such access has been
established under Section 3.1. These processes shall include:
6.1 One or more method(s) for determining vendor electronic remote access;
6.2 One or more method(s) for disabling vendor electronic remote access; and
6.3 One or more method(s) for detecting known or suspected inbound and
outbound malicious communications for vendor electronic remote access.
24
Attachment 2
Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Cyber Security Plan(s) for Assets Containing
Low Impact BES Cyber Systems
Section 1. Cyber Security Awareness: An example of evidence for Section 1 may include, but is
not limited to, documentation that the reinforcement of cyber security practices
occurred at least once every 15 calendar months. The evidence could be
documentation through one or more of the following methods:
• Direct communications (for example, e‐mails, memos, or computer‐based
training);
• Indirect communications (for example, posters, intranet, or brochures); or
• Management support and reinforcement (for example, presentations or
meetings).
Section 2. Physical Security Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 2 may include, but are
not limited to:
• Documentation of the selected access control(s) (e.g., card key, locks, perimeter
controls), monitoring controls (e.g., alarm systems, human observation), or other
operational, procedural, or technical physical security controls that control
physical access to both:
a. The asset, if any, or the locations of the low impact BES Cyber Systems within
the asset; and
b. The Cyber Asset(s) specified by the Responsible Entity that provide(s)
electronic access controls implemented for Attachment 1, Section 3.1, if any.
Section 3. Electronic Access Controls: Examples of evidence for Section 3 may include, but are
not limited to:
1. Documentation showing that at each asset or group of assets containing low
impact BES Cyber Systems, routable communication between a low impact BES
Cyber System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset is restricted by electronic
access controls to permit only inbound and outbound electronic access that the
Responsible Entity deems necessary, except where an entity provides rationale
that communication is used for time‐sensitive protection or control functions
between intelligent electronic devices. Examples of such documentation may
include, but are not limited to representative diagrams that illustrate control of
inbound and outbound communication(s) between the low impact BES Cyber
System(s) and a Cyber Asset(s) outside the asset containing low impact BES
Cyber System(s) or lists of implemented electronic access controls (e.g., access
control lists restricting IP addresses, ports, or services; implementing
unidirectional gateways).
25
Attachment 2
2. Documentation of authentication for Dial‐up Connectivity (e.g., dial out only to a
preprogrammed number to deliver data, dial‐back modems, modems that must
be remotely controlled by the control center or control room, or access control
on the BES Cyber System).
Section 4. Cyber Security Incident Response: An example of evidence for Section 4 may include,
but is not limited to, dated documentation, such as policies, procedures, or process
documents of one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) developed
either by asset or group of assets that include the following processes:
1. to identify, classify, and respond to Cyber Security Incidents; to determine
whether an identified Cyber Security Incident is a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident and for notifying the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(E‐ISAC);
2. to identify and document the roles and responsibilities for Cyber Security
Incident response by groups or individuals (e.g., initiating, documenting,
monitoring, reporting, etc.);
3. for incident handling of a Cyber Security Incident (e.g., containment, eradication,
or recovery/incident resolution);
4. for testing the plan(s) along with the dated documentation that a test has been
completed at least once every 36 calendar months; and
5. to update, as needed, Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) within 180
calendar days after completion of a test or actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident.
Section 5. Transient Cyber Asset and Removable Media Malicious Code Risk Mitigation:
1. Examples of evidence for Section 5.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern
updates, application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication,
or other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a Transient
Cyber Asset does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the
introduction of malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the
vendor or Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset does
not have the capability.
2. Examples of evidence for Section 5.2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or
procedures that document a review of the installed antivirus update level;
memoranda, electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from
the party other than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update
process, the use of application whitelisting, use of live operating systems or
system hardening performed by the party other than the Responsible Entity;
evidence from change management systems, electronic mail or contracts that
26
Attachment 2
identifies the Responsible Entity’s acceptance that the practices of the party
other than the Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other
method(s) to mitigate malicious code for Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a
party other than the Responsible Entity. If a Transient Cyber Asset does not have
the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the introduction of malicious code,
evidence may include documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party
other than the Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset
does not have the capability.
Examples of evidence for Attachment 1, Section 5.2.2 may include, but are not
limited to, documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or
contracts that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigation is
necessary and has been implemented prior to connecting the Transient Cyber
Asset managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity.
3. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to detect malicious code such as
results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on‐demand
scanning. Examples of evidence for Section 5.3.2 may include, but are not limited
to, documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating the threat of
detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the method(s)
used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and the
mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or documented
confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed to be free of
malicious code.
Section 6. Vendor Electronic Remote Access Security Controls: Examples of evidence
showing the implementation of the process for Section 6 may include, but are
not limited to:
1. For Section 6.1, documentation showing:
• steps to preauthorize access;
• alerts generated by vendor log on;
• session monitoring;
• security information management logging alerts;
• time‐of‐need session initiation;
• session recording;
• system logs; or
• other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
2. For Section 6.2, documentation showing:
• disabling vendor electronic remote access user or system accounts;
27
Attachment 2
• disabling inbound and/or outbound hardware or software ports,
services, or access permissions on applications, firewall, IDS/IPS,
router, switch, VPN, Remote Desktop, remote control, or other
hardware or software used for providing vendor electronic remote
access;
• disabling communications protocols (such as IP) used for systems
which establish and/or maintain vendor electronic remote access;
• Removing physical layer connectivity (e.g., disconnect an Ethernet
cable, power down equipment);
• administrative control documentation listing the methods, steps, or
systems used to disable vendor electronic remote access; or
• other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
3. For Section 6.3, documentation showing implementation of processes or
technologies which have the ability to detect malicious communications such
as:
• Anti‐malware technologies;
• Intrusion Detection System (IDS)/Intrusion Prevention System (IPS);
• Automated or manual log reviews;
• alerting; or
• other operational, procedural, or technical controls.
28
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-003-9.pdf ---

