--- START DOCUMENT: cip-015-1.pdf ---
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
2. Number: CIP-015-1
3. Purpose: To improve the probability of detecting anomalous or unauthorized
network activity in order to facilitate improved response and recovery from an attack.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
Page 1 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems,
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Reliability Standard CIP-015-
1:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to
one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact with
External Routable Connectivity (ERC) according to the
identification and categorization processes required by CIP-002
or any subsequent version of that Reliability Standard.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for CIP-015-1.
Page 3 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) for
internal network security monitoring of networks protected by the Responsible
Entity’s Electronic Security Perimeter(s) of high impact BES Cyber Systems and
medium impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity to provide
methods for detecting and evaluating anomalous network activity. The documented
process(es) shall include each of the following requirement Parts: [Violation Risk
Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Same Day Operations and Operations Assessment]
1.1. Implement, using a risk-based rationale, network data feed(s) to monitor
network activity; including connections, devices, and network communications.
1.2. Implement one or more method(s) to detect anomalous network activity using
the network data feed(s) from Part 1.1.
1.3. Implement one or more method(s) to evaluate anomalous network activity
detected in Part 1.2. to determine further action(s).
M1. Evidence must include each of the documented process(es) that collectively include
each of the requirement Parts in Requirement R1 and evidence to demonstrate
implementation of the process(es). Examples of evidence of implementation of the
requirement Parts may include, but is not limited to:
Part 1.1.
• Documentation detailing network data feed(s) that includes a documented risk-
based rationale that describes how network data feed(s) were selected for data
collection.
Part 1.2.
• Documentation of anomalous network detection events;
• Documentation of configuration settings of internal network security monitoring
systems;
• Documentation of network communication baseline used to detect anomalous
network activity; or
• Documentation of other methods used to detect anomalous network activity.
Part 1.3.
• Documentation of method(s) used to evaluate anomalous activity;
• Documentation of actions in response to detected anomalies; or
• Documentation of escalation process(es) that could include CIP-008 Cyber
Security Incident response plan(s).
Page 4 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement, except during CIP Exceptional
Circumstances, one or more documented process(es) to retain internal network
security monitoring data associated with network activity determined to be
anomalous by the Responsible Entity at a minimum until the action is complete in
support of Requirement R1, Part 1.3. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon:
Same Day Operations and Operations Assessment]
Note: The Responsible Entity is not required to retain internal network security
monitoring data that is not relevant to anomalous network activity detected in
Requirement R1, Part 1.2.
M2. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, documentation of the
internal network security monitoring data retention process(es), system
configuration(s), or system-generated report(s) showing data retention with timelines
sufficient to support Requirement R1, Part 1.3.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement, except during CIP Exceptional
Circumstances, one or more documented process(es) to protect internal network
security monitoring data collected in support of Requirement R1 and data retained in
support of Requirement R2 to mitigate the risks of unauthorized deletion or
modification. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Same Day Operations and
Operations Assessment]
M3. Evidence may include, but is not limited to, documentation demonstrating how
internal network security monitoring data is being protected from the risk of
unauthorized deletion or modification.
Page 5 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring
and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability
Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show
that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer
period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved, or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records, and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 6 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity did not
N/A
R1. N/A The Responsible Entity did not
include any of the applicable
implement, using a risk-based
requirement Parts for
rationale, network data feed(s)
detecting and evaluating
to monitor network activity;
anomalous network activity.
including connections, devices,
and network communications.
(1.1.).
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement one or more
method(s) to detect
anomalous network activity
using the network data
feed(s) from Part 1.1 (1.2.).
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement one or more
method(s) to evaluate
anomalous network activity
detected in Part 1.2. to
determine further action(s)
(1.3.).
N/A The Responsible Entity did not
N/A
R2. N/A
implement, except during CIP
Exceptional Circumstances,
one or more documented
process(es) to retain internal
network security monitoring
Page 7 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
data associated with network
activity determined to be
anomalous by the Responsible
Entity, at a minimum until the
action is complete, in support
of Part 1.3.
N/A The Responsible Entity did not,
N/A
R3. N/A
except during CIP Exceptional
Circumstances, implement one
or more documented
process(es) to protect internal
network security monitoring
data collected in support of
Requirement R1 and data
retained in support of
Requirement R2 to mitigate
the risks of unauthorized
deletion or modification.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
Link to the Implementation Plan and other important associated documents.
Page 8 of 9
CIP-015-1 - Cyber Security – Internal Network Security Monitoring
Version History
Version Date Action Change
Tracking
1 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
1 6/26/2025 FERC Order approving CIP-015-1.
Docket No. RM24-7-000.
Page 9 of 9
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-015-1.pdf ---

