--- START DOCUMENT: cip-013-2.pdf ---
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
2. Number: CIP-013-2
3. Purpose: To mitigate cyber security risks to the reliable operation of the Bulk
Electric System (BES) by implementing security controls for supply chain risk
management of BES Cyber Systems.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
Page 1 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in
this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset
of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. Is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. Performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-013-2:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESPs).
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
Page 2 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the identification and categorization process
required by CIP-002 or any subsequent version of that Reliability
Standard.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03.
Page 3 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall develop one or more documented supply chain cyber
security risk management plan(s) for high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) and Physical
Access Control Systems (PACS). The plan(s) shall include: [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. One or more process(es) used in planning for the procurement of BES Cyber
Systems and their associated EACMS and PACS to identify and assess cyber
security risk(s) to the Bulk Electric System from vendor products or services
resulting from: (i) procuring and installing vendor equipment and software; and
(ii) transitions from one vendor(s) to another vendor(s).
1.2. One or more process(es) used in procuring BES Cyber Systems, and their
associated EACMS and PACS, that address the following, as applicable:
1.2.1. Notification by the vendor of vendor-identified incidents related to the
products or services provided to the Responsible Entity that pose cyber
security risk to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.2. Coordination of responses to vendor-identified incidents related to the
products or services provided to the Responsible Entity that pose cyber
security risk to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.3. Notification by vendors when remote or onsite access should no longer
be granted to vendor representatives;
1.2.4. Disclosure by vendors of known vulnerabilities related to the products or
services provided to the Responsible Entity;
1.2.5. Verification of software integrity and authenticity of all software and
patches provided by the vendor for use in the BES Cyber System and their
associated EACMS and PACS; and
1.2.6. Coordination of controls for vendor-initiated remote access.
M1. Evidence shall include one or more documented supply chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) as specified in the Requirement.
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement its supply chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) specified in Requirement R1. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
Note: Implementation of the plan does not require the Responsible Entity to
renegotiate or abrogate existing contracts (including amendments to master
agreements and purchase orders). Additionally, the following issues are beyond the
scope of Requirement R2: (1) the actual terms and conditions of a procurement
contract; and (2) vendor performance and adherence to a contract.
Page 4 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
M2. Evidence shall include documentation to demonstrate implementation of the supply
chain cyber security risk management plan(s), which could include, but is not limited
to, correspondence, policy documents, or working documents that demonstrate use
of the supply chain cyber security risk management plan.
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall review and obtain CIP Senior Manager or delegate
approval of its supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s) specified in
Requirement R1 at least once every 15 calendar months. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
M3. Evidence shall include the dated supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s)
approved by the CIP Senior Manager or delegate(s) and additional evidence to
demonstrate review of the supply chain cyber security risk management plan(s).
Evidence may include, but is not limited to, policy documents, revision history,
records of review, or workflow evidence from a document management system that
indicate review of supply chain risk management plan(s) at least once every 15
calendar months; and documented approval by the CIP Senior Manager or delegate.
Page 5 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity,
or any entity as otherwise designated by an Applicable Governmental Authority,
in their respective roles of monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with
mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in their respective
jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period of time an entity
is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to
show that it was compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and
Enforcement Program” refers to the identification of the processes that will be
used to evaluate data or information for the purpose of assessing performance
or outcomes with the associated Reliability Standard.
Page 6 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
developed one or more developed one or more developed one or more developed one or more
documented supply chain documented supply chain documented supply chain documented supply chain
cyber security risk cyber security risk cyber security risk cyber security risk
management plan(s) which management plan(s) which management plan(s), but management plan(s), but
include the use of include the use of the plan(s) did not include the plan(s) did not include
process(es) in planning for process(es) in planning for the use of process(es) in the use of process(es) in
procurement of BES Cyber procurement of BES Cyber planning for procurement of planning for procurement of
Systems, and their Systems, and their BES Cyber Systems, and BES Cyber Systems, and
associated EACMS and associated EACMS and their associated EACMS and their associated EACMS and
PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess
cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the
BES as specified in Part 1.1, BES as specified in Part 1.1, BES as specified in Part 1.1, BES as specified in Part 1.1,
and include the use of and include the use of or the plan(s) did not and the plan(s) did not
process(es) for procuring process(es) for procuring include the use of include the use of
BES Cyber Systems and their BES Cyber Systems and their process(es) for procuring process(es) for procuring
associated EACMS and associated EACMS and BES Cyber Systems and their BES Cyber Systems and their
PACS, as specified in Part PACS, as specified in Part associated EACMS and associated EACMS and
1.2, but the plans do not 1.2, but the plans do not PACS, as specified in Part PACS, as specified in Part
include one of the parts in include two or more of the 1.2. 1.2.
Part 1.2.1 through Part parts in Part 1.2.1 through
OR
1.2.6. Part 1.2.6.
The Responsible Entity did
not develop one or more
documented supply chain
cyber security risk
Page 7 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
management plan(s) as
specified in the
Requirement.
R2. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
implemented its supply implemented its supply implemented its supply implemented its supply
chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk chain cyber security risk
management plan(s) management plan(s) management plan(s), but management plan(s), but
including the use of including the use of did not implement the use did not implement the use
process(es) in planning for process(es) in planning for of process(es) in planning of process(es) in planning
procurement of BES Cyber procurement of BES Cyber for procurement of BES for procurement of BES
Systems, and their Systems, and their Cyber Systems, and their Cyber Systems, and their
associated EACMS and associated EACMS and associated EACMS and associated EACMS and
PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess PACS, to identify and assess
cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the cyber security risk(s) to the
BES as specified in BES as specified in BES as specified in BES as specified in
Requirement R1 Part 1.1, Requirement R1 Part 1.1, Requirement R1 Part 1.1, or Requirement R1 Part 1.1,
and including the use of and including the use of did not implement the use and did not implement the
process(es) for procuring process(es) for procuring of process(es) for procuring use of process(es) for
BES Cyber Systems and their BES Cyber Systems and their BES Cyber Systems and their procuring BES Cyber
associated EACMS and associated EACMS and associated EACMS and Systems and their
PACS, as specified in PACS, as specified in PACS, as specified in associated EACMS and
Requirement R1 Part 1.2, Requirement R1 Part 1.2, Requirement R1 Part 1.2. PACS, as specified in
but did not implement one but did not implement two Requirement R1 Part 1.2;
of the parts in Requirement or more of the parts in
OR
R1 Part 1.2.1 through Part Requirement R1 Part 1.2.1
The Responsible Entity did
1.2.6. through Part 1.2.6.
not implement its supply
Page 8 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
chain cyber security risk
management plan(s)
specified in the
requirement.
R3. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did
reviewed and obtained CIP reviewed and obtained CIP reviewed and obtained CIP not review and obtain CIP
Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate
approval of its supply chain approval of its supply chain approval of its supply chain approval of its supply chain
cyber security risk cyber security risk cyber security risk cyber security risk
management plan(s) but did management plan(s) but did management plan(s) but did management plan(s) within
so more than 15 calendar so more than 16 calendar so more than 17 calendar 18 calendar months of the
months but less than or months but less than or months but less than or previous review as specified
equal to 16 calendar months equal to 17 calendar months equal to 18 calendar months in the Requirement.
since the previous review as since the previous review as since the previous review as
specified in the specified in the specified in the
Requirement. Requirement. Requirement.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03
• CIP-013-2 Technical Rationale
Page 9 of 10
CIP-013-2 – Cyber Security - Supply Chain Risk Management
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 08/10/17 Approved by the NERC Respond to FERC Order No.
Board of Trustees. 829.
1 10/18/18 FERC Order approving
CIP-013-1. Docket No.
RM17-13-000.
2 11/05/2020 Approved by the NERC Modified to address directive
Board of Trustees. in FERC Order No. 850.
2 3/18/2021 FERC Order approving
CIP-013-2.Docket No.
RD21-2-000.
Page 10 of 10
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-013-2.pdf ---

