--- START DOCUMENT: cip-009-7.pdf ---
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
2. Number: CIP-009-7
3. Purpose: To recover reliability functions performed by BES Cyber Systems (BCS) by
specifying recovery plan requirements in support of the continued
stability, operability, and reliability of the Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
Page 1 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in
this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset
of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-009-7:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
Page 2 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to
one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002-5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to define
the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan”.
Page 3 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall have one or more documented recovery plan(s) that collectively include each of the
applicable Requirement Parts in CIP-009-7 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M1. Evidence must include the documented recovery plan(s) that collectively include the applicable Requirement Parts in CIP-
009-7 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications.
CIP-009-7 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Conditions for activation of the recovery An example of evidence may include, but is
plan(s). not limited to, one or more plans that
1. Electronic Access Control and
include language identifying conditions for
Monitoring Systems (EACMS); and
activation of the recovery plan(s).
2. Physical Access Control Systems
(PACS)
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Roles and responsibilities of responders. Examples of evidence may include, but are
1. EACMS; and not limited to, one or more recovery plans
that include language identifying the roles
2. PACS
and responsibilities of responders.
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.3 High impact BCS and their associated: One or more processes for the backup and An example of evidence may include, but is
storage of information required to recover not limited to, documentation of specific
1. EACMS; and
Applicable System functionality. processes for the backup and storage of
2. PACS
information required to recover Applicable
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
System functionality.
1. EACMS; and
2. PACS
1.4 One or more processes to verify the Examples of evidence may include, but are
High impact BCS and their associated:
Page 4 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-7 Table R1 – Recovery Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1. EACMS; and successful completion of the backup not limited to, logs, workflow or other
processes in Part 1.3 and to address any documentation confirming that the backup
2. PACS
backup failures. process completed successfully and backup
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and
failures, if any, were addressed.
their associated:
1. EACMS; and PACS
1.5 One or more processes to preserve data, Examples of evidence may include, but are
High impact BCS and their associated:
per system capability, for determining the not limited to, procedures to preserve
1. EACMS; and
cause of a Cyber Security Incident that data, such as preserving a corrupted drive
2. PACS
triggers activation of the recovery plan(s). or making a data mirror of the system
Medium impact BCS and their associated: Data preservation should not impede or before proceeding with recovery.
1. EACMS; and restrict recovery.
2. PACS
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
part
Page 5 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement its documented recovery plan(s) to collectively include each of the applicable
Requirement Parts in CIP-009-7 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning and Real-time Operations.]
M2. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates implementation of each of the
applicable Requirement Parts in CIP-009-7 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing.
CIP-009-7 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated: Test each of the recovery plans referenced Examples of evidence may include, but are
in Requirement R1 at least once every 15 not limited to, dated evidence of a test (by
1. EACMS; and
calendar months: recovering from an actual incident, with a
2. PACS
paper drill or tabletop exercise, or with an
• By recovering from an actual incident;
operational exercise) of the recovery plan
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and
• With a paper drill or tabletop exercise;
at least once every 15 calendar months.
their associated:
or
For the paper drill or full operational
1. EACMS; and
• With an operational exercise. exercise, evidence may include meeting
2. PACS notices, minutes, or other records of
exercise findings.
2.2 High impact BCS and their associated: Test a representative sample of Examples of evidence may include, but are
information used to recover Applicable not limited to, operational logs or test
1. EACMS; and
System functionality at least once every 15 results with criteria for testing the usability
2. PACS
calendar months to ensure that the (e.g., sample tape load, browsing tape
information is useable and is compatible contents) and compatibility with current
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and
with current configurations. system configurations (e.g., manual, or
their associated:
automated comparison checkpoints
1. EACMS; and An actual recovery that incorporates the
between backup media contents and
information used to recover Applicable
2. PACS current configuration).
System functionality substitutes for this
test.
2.3 High impact BCS Test each of the recovery plans referenced Examples of evidence may include, but are
in Requirement R1 at least once every 36 not limited to, dated documentation of:
calendar months through an operational
• An operational exercise at least once
exercise of the recovery plans in an
every 36 calendar months between
environment representative of the
exercises, that demonstrates recovery
production environment.
in a representative environment; or
Page 6 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-7 Table R2 – Recovery Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
• An actual recovery response that
occurred within the 36 calendar month
An actual recovery response may
timeframe that exercised the recovery
substitute for an operational exercise.
plans.
Page 7 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall maintain each of its recovery plan(s) in accordance with each of the applicable Requirement Parts
in CIP-009-7 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon:
Operations Assessment].
M3. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, each of the Applicable Requirement parts in CIP-009-7 Table R3 – Recovery
Plan Review, Update and Communication.
CIP-009-7 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High impact BCS and their associated: No later than 90 calendar days after Examples of evidence may include, but are
completion of a recovery plan test or actual not limited to, all of the following:
1. EACMS; and
recovery:
2. PACS
1. Dated documentation of identified
3.1.1. Document any lessons learned deficiencies or lessons learned for
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and
associated with a recovery plan each recovery plan test or actual
their associated:
test or actual recovery or incident recovery or dated
1. EACMS; and
document the absence of any documentation stating there were no
2. PACS lessons learned; lessons learned;
3.1.2. Update the recovery plan based on 2. Dated and revised recovery plan
any documented lessons learned showing any changes based on the
associated with the plan; and lessons learned; and
3.1.3. Notify each person or group with a 3. Evidence of plan update distribution
defined role in the recovery plan of including, but not limited to:
the updates to the recovery plan
• Emails;
based on any documented lessons
• USPS or other mail service;
learned.
• Electronic distribution system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
3.2 High impact BCS and their associated: No later than 60 calendar days after a Examples of evidence may include, but are
change to the roles or responsibilities, not limited to, all of the following:
1. EACMS; and
responders, or technology that the
1. Dated and revised recovery plan with
2. PACS
Responsible Entity determines would
changes to the roles or
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers and impact the ability to execute the recovery
responsibilities, responders, or
their associated: plan:
technology; and
1. EACMS; and 3.2.1. Update the recovery plan; and
2. Evidence of plan update distribution
2. PACS 3.2.2. Notify each person or group with a including, but not limited to:
Page 8 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
CIP-009-7 Table R3 – Recovery Plan Review, Update and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
defined role in the recovery plan of • Emails;
the updates.
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 9 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing
compliance with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required to
retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence
retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may
ask an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period
since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified below
unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as part of an
investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard for
three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the
non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time specified
above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent
audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
• Compliance Audits
• Self-Certifications
• Spot Checking
• Compliance Investigations
• Self-Reporting
• Complaints
1.4. Additional Compliance Information: None
Page 10 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 N/A The Responsible Entity’s The Responsible Entity plan(s) The Responsible Entity did not
plan(s) did not address one of did not address two of the create recovery plan(s) for
the requirements included in requirements included in Parts Applicable Systems.
Parts 1.2 through 1.5. 1.2 through 1.5.
OR
The Responsible Entity plan(s)
did not address the conditions
for activation in Part 1.1.
OR
The Responsible Entity plan(s)
did not address three or more
of the requirements in Parts
1.2 through 1.5.
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did not
test the recovery plan(s) test the recovery plan(s) not test the recovery plan(s) test the recovery plan(s)
according to Part 2.1 within within 16 calendar months, according to Part 2.1 within according to Part 2.1 within 18
15 calendar months, not not exceeding 17 calendar 17 calendar months, not calendar months between
exceeding 16 calendar months between tests of the exceeding 18 calendar tests of the plan. (Part 2.1)
months between tests of the plan. (Part 2.1) months between tests of the
OR
plan(s). (Part 2.1) plan. (Part 2.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did not test a representative sample
The Responsible Entity did not test a representative sample The Responsible Entity did not of the information used in the
test a representative sample of the information used in the test a representative sample recovery of Applicable System
of the information used in the recovery of Applicable System of the information used in the functionality according to Part
recovery of Applicable System functionality according to Part recovery of Applicable System 2.2 within 18 calendar months
functionality according to Part 2.2 within 16 calendar functionality according to Part between tests. (Part 2.2)
2.2 within 15 calendar months, not exceeding 17 2.2 within 17 calendar
OR
months, not exceeding 16 calendar months between months, not exceeding 18
tests. (Part 2.2) The Responsible Entity did not
test the recovery plan(s)
Page 11 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
calendar months between OR calendar months between according to Part 2.3 within 39
tests. (Part 2.2) tests. (Part 2.2) calendar months between
The Responsible Entity did not
tests of the plan(s). (Part 2.3)
OR test the recovery plan OR
according to Part 2.3 within
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
37 calendar months, not
test the recovery plan test the recovery plan
exceeding 38 calendar
according to Part 2.3 within according to Part 2.3 within
months between tests. (Part
36 calendar months, not 38 calendar months, not
2.3)
exceeding 37 calendar exceeding 39 calendar
months between tests. (Part months between tests. (Part
2.3) 2.3)
R3 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity neither The Responsible Entity neither
notify each person or group update the recovery plan(s) documented lessons learned documented lessons learned
with a defined role in the based on any documented nor documented the absence nor documented the absence
recovery plan(s) of updates lessons learned within 90 and of any lessons learned within of any lessons learned within
within 90 and less than 120 less than 120 calendar days of 90 and less than 120 calendar 120 calendar days of each
calendar days of the update each recovery plan test or days of each recovery plan test recovery plan test or actual
being completed. (Part 3.1.3) actual recovery. (Part 3.1.2) or actual recovery. (Part 3.1.1) recovery. (Part 3.1.1)
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
notify each person or group update the recovery plan(s)
with a defined role in the based on any documented
recovery plan(s) of updates lessons learned within 120
within 120 calendar days of the calendar days of each recovery
update being completed. (Part plan test or actual recovery.
3.1.3) (Part 3.1.2)
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
update the recovery plan(s) or update the recovery plan(s) or
notified each person or group notified each person or group
with a defined role within 60 with a defined role within 90
and less than 90 calendar days calendar days of any of the
Page 12 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-009-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
of any of the following changes following changes that the
that the responsible entity responsible entity determines
determines would impact the would impact the ability to
ability to execute the plan: execute the plan:
• Roles or responsibilities, or • Roles or responsibilities, or
• Responders, or • Responders, or
• Technology changes. (Part • Technology changes. (Part
3.2) (3.2)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-009-7 Technical Rationale
Page 13 of 14
CIP-009-7 — Cyber Security — Recovery Plans for BES Cyber Systems
Version History
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to 3/24/06
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements
and to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or
system from service in order to perform
testing, in response to FERC order issued
September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP
standards and to
revise format to
use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-009-5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed FERC
directives from
Order No. 791
6 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-009-6.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
Page 14 of 14
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-009-7.pdf ---

