--- START DOCUMENT: cip-008-6.pdf ---
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
2. Number: CIP-008-6
3. Purpose: To mitigate the risk to the reliable operation of the BES as the result of a
Cyber Security Incident by specifying incident response requirements.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein,
the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme where the Remedial Action
Scheme is subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or
Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme where the Remedial Action
Scheme is subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or
Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-008-6:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters.
Page 2 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
4.2.3.3 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
5. Effective Dates:
See Implementation Plan for CIP-008-6.
6. Background:
Standard CIP-008 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber security.
CIP-002 requires the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems. CIP-
003, CIP-004, CIP-005, CIP-006, CIP-007, CIP-008, CIP-009, CIP-010, and CIP-011
require a minimum level of organizational, operational, and procedural controls to
mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements.
An entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes,
but must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it is commonly understood. For example, documented processes describing a
response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident response plans and recovery
plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an approach involving multiple
procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans and procedures involving a particular subject matter. Examples in
the standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel
training program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could
also be referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply
any additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Page 3 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented processes.
These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk
Electric System. A review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability
standards for UFLS program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of
300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems
to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management
Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact
and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used in the
“Applicable Systems” column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
Page 4 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall document one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) that collectively include each
of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications. [Violation
Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M1. Evidence must include each of the documented plan(s) that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in
CIP-008-6 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications.
CIP-008-6 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes to identify, An example of evidence may include, but
associated: classify, and respond to Cyber Security is not limited to, dated documentation of
• EACMS Incidents. Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
that include the process(es) to identify,
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
classify, and respond to Cyber Security
their associated:
Incidents.
• EACMS
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their One or more processes: Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: 1.2.1 That include criteria to evaluate are not limited to, dated documentation
• EACMS and define attempts to of Cyber Security Incident response
compromise; plan(s) that provide guidance or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
thresholds for determining which Cyber
their associated: 1.2.2 To determine if an identified
Security Incidents are also Reportable
Cyber Security Incident is:
• EACMS
Cyber Security Incidents or a Cyber
• A Reportable Cyber
Security Incident that is determined to be
Security Incident; or
an attempt to compromise a system
• An attempt to
identified in the “Applicable Systems”
compromise, as
column including justification for attempt
determined by applying
determination criteria and documented
the criteria from Part
processes for notification.
1.2.1, one or more
systems identified in the
“Applicable Systems”
column for this Part; and
1.2.3 To provide notification per
Requirement R4.
Page 5 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-6 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their The roles and responsibilities of Cyber An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Security Incident response groups or is not limited to, dated Cyber Security
• EACMS individuals. Incident response process(es) or
procedure(s) that define roles and
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
responsibilities (e.g., monitoring,
their associated:
reporting, initiating, documenting, etc.) of
• EACMS
Cyber Security Incident response groups
or individuals.
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Incident handling procedures for Cyber An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Security Incidents. is not limited to, dated Cyber Security
• EACMS Incident response process(es) or
procedure(s) that address incident
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
handling (e.g., containment, eradication,
their associated:
recovery/incident resolution).
• EACMS
Page 6 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement each of its documented Cyber Security Incident response plans to collectively
include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Implementation and Testing. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Real-Time Operations].
M2. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates implementation of each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing.
CIP-008-6 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Test each Cyber Security Incident Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: response plan(s) at least once every 15 are not limited to, dated evidence of a
calendar months: lessons-learned report that includes a
• EACMS
summary of the test or a compilation of
• By responding to an actual
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and notes, logs, and communication resulting
Reportable Cyber Security Incident;
their associated: from the test. Types of exercises may
• With a paper drill or tabletop
include discussion or operations based
• EACMS
exercise of a Reportable Cyber
exercises.
Security Incident; or
• With an operational exercise of a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Use the Cyber Security Incident response Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: plan(s) under Requirement R1 when are not limited to, incident reports, logs,
responding to a Reportable Cyber and notes that were kept during the
• EACMS
Security Incident, responding to a Cyber incident response process, and follow-up
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and Security Incident that attempted to documentation that describes deviations
their associated: compromise a system identified in the taken from the plan during the incident
“Applicable Systems” column for this response or exercise.
• EACMS
Part, or performing an exercise of a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
Document deviations from the plan(s)
taken during the response to the incident
or exercise.
Page 7 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-6 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Retain records related to Reportable An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Cyber Security Incidents and Cyber is not limited to, dated documentation,
Security Incidents that attempted to such as security logs, police reports,
• EACMS
compromise a system identified in the emails, response forms or checklists,
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and “Applicable Systems” column for this Part forensic analysis results, restoration
their associated: as per the Cyber Security Incident records, and post-incident review notes
response plan(s) under Requirement R1. related to Reportable Cyber Security
• EACMS
Incidents and a Cyber Security Incident
that is determined to be an attempt to
compromise a system identified in the
“Applicable Systems” column.
Page 8 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall maintain each of its Cyber Security Incident response plans according to each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Review, Update, and
Communication. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Assessment].
M3. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates maintenance of each Cyber
Security Incident response plan according to the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R3 – Cyber Security
Incident Response Plan Review, Update, and Communication.
CIP-008-6 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Review, Update, and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their No later than 90 calendar days after An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: completion of a Cyber Security Incident not limited to, all of the following:
response plan(s) test or actual Reportable
• EACMS 1. Dated documentation of post
Cyber Security Incident response:
incident(s) review meeting notes or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
3.1.1. Document any lessons learned or follow-up report showing lessons
their associated:
document the absence of any learned associated with the Cyber
• EACMS lessons learned; Security Incident response plan(s)
test or actual Reportable Cyber
3.1.2. Update the Cyber Security
Security Incident response or dated
Incident response plan based on
documentation stating there were no
any documented lessons learned
lessons learned;
associated with the plan; and
2. Dated and revised Cyber Security
3.1.3. Notify each person or group with
Incident response plan showing any
a defined role in the Cyber
changes based on the lessons
Security Incident response plan of
learned; and
the updates to the Cyber Security
Incident response plan based on 3. Evidence of plan update distribution
any documented lessons learned. including, but not limited to:
• Emails;
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 9 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-6 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Review, Update, and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their No later than 60 calendar days after a An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: change to the roles or responsibilities, not limited to:
Cyber Security Incident response groups or
• EACMS 1. Dated and revised Cyber Security
individuals, or technology that the
Incident response plan with
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and Responsible Entity determines would
changes to the roles or
their associated: impact the ability to execute the plan:
responsibilities, responders or
• EACMS 3.2.1. Update the Cyber Security technology; and
Incident response plan(s); and
2. Evidence of plan update
3.2.2. Notify each person or group with distribution including, but not
a defined role in the Cyber limited to:
Security Incident response plan of • Emails;
the updates. • USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system;
or
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 10 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R4. Each Responsible Entity shall notify the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC) and, if subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States, the United States National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
(NCCIC),1 or their successors, of a Reportable Cyber Security Incident and a Cyber Security Incident that was an attempt to
compromise, as determined by applying the criteria from Requirement R1, Part 1.2.1, a system identified in the “Applicable
Systems” column, unless prohibited by law, in accordance with each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table
R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations
Assessment].
M4. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates notification of each determined
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and a Cyber Security Incident that was an attempt to compromise a system identified in
the “Applicable Systems” column according to the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-6 Table R4 – Notifications and
Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents.
CIP-008-6 Table R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Initial notifications and updates shall Examples of evidence may include,
their associated: include the following attributes, at a but are not limited to, dated
minimum, to the extent known: documentation of initial notifications
• EACMS
and updates to the E-ISAC and NCCIC.
4.1.1 The functional impact;
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated: 4.1.2 The attack vector used; and
• EACMS 4.1.3 The level of intrusion that was
achieved or attempted.
1 The National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) is the successor organization of the Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team
(ICS-CERT). In 2017, NCCIC realigned its organizational structure and integrated like functions previously performed independently by the ICS-CERT and the United States
Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT).
Page 11 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-6 Table R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and After the Responsible Entity’s Examples of evidence may include,
their associated: determination made pursuant to but are not limited to, dated
documented process(es) in Requirement documentation of notices to the E-
• EACMS
R1, Part 1.2, provide initial notification ISAC and NCCIC.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems within the following timelines:
and their associated:
• One hour after the determination
• EACMS of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident.
• By the end of the next calendar day
after determination that a Cyber
Security Incident was an attempt to
compromise a system identified in
the “Applicable Systems” column
for this Part.
4.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Provide updates, if any, within 7 calendar Examples of evidence may include,
their associated: days of determination of new or changed but are not limited to, dated
attribute information required in Part 4.1. documentation of submissions to the
• EACMS
E-ISAC and NCCIC.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
and their associated:
• EACMS
Page 12 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
The Regional Entity shall serve as the Compliance Enforcement Authority (“CEA”) unless the
applicable entity is owned, operated, or controlled by the Regional Entity. In such cases the
ERO or a Regional Entity approved by FERC or other applicable governmental authority shall
serve as the CEA.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required to
retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence
retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask
an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period
since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified below
unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as part of an
investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard for
three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the
non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time specified
above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent
audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
• Compliance Audit
• Self-Certification
• Spot Checking
• Compliance Investigation
• Self-Reporting
• Complaint
1.4. Additional Compliance Information:
None
Page 13 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
2. Table of Compliance Elements
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Long Term Lower N/A N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has developed the Cyber has not developed a
Security Incident Cyber Security Incident
response plan(s), but the response plan with one
plan does not include or more processes to
the roles and identify, classify, and
responsibilities of Cyber respond to Cyber
Security Incident Security Incidents. (1.1)
response groups or
OR
individuals. (1.3)
The Responsible Entity
OR
has developed a Cyber
The Responsible Entity Security Incident
has developed the Cyber response plan, but the
Security Incident plan does not include
response plan(s), but the one or more processes
plan does not include to identify Reportable
incident handling Cyber Security Incidents
procedures for Cyber or a Cyber Security
Security Incidents. (1.4) Incident that was an
attempt to compromise,
OR
as determined by
The Responsible Entity applying the criteria
has developed a Cyber from Part 1.2.1, a
Security Incident system identified in the
response plan, but the “Applicable Systems”
plan does not include column for Part 1.2.
one or more processes (1.2)
to provide notification
Page 14 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
per Requirement R4.
(1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
has developed a Cyber
Security Incident
response plan, but the
plan does not include
one or more processes
that include criteria to
evaluate and define
attempts to
compromise. (1.2)
R2 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning has not tested the Cyber has not tested the Cyber has not tested the Cyber has not tested the Cyber
Security Incident Security Incident Security Incident Security Incident
Real-time
response plan(s) within response plan(s) within response plan(s) within response plan(s) within
Operations
15 calendar months, not 16 calendar months, not 17 calendar months, not 18 calendar months
exceeding 16 calendar exceeding 17 calendar exceeding 18 calendar between tests of the
months between tests months between tests of months between tests of plan(s). (2.1)
of the plan(s). (2.1) the plan(s). (2.1) the plan(s). (2.1)
OR
OR
The Responsible Entity
The Responsible Entity did not retain relevant
did not document records related to
deviations, if any, from Reportable Cyber
the plan during a test or Security Incidents or
when a Reportable Cyber Security Incidents
Cyber Security Incident that were an attempt to
or a Cyber Security compromise a system
Incident that was an identified in the
Page 15 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
attempt to compromise “Applicable Systems”
a system identified in column for Part 2.3.
the “Applicable (2.3)
Systems” column for
Part 2.2 occurs. (2.2)
The Responsible Entity
R3 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
has not notified each
Assessment has not updated the has neither documented has neither documented
person or group with a
Cyber Security Incident lessons learned nor lessons learned nor
defined role in the
response plan based on documented the documented the
Cyber Security Incident
any documented lessons absence of any lessons absence of any lessons
response plan of
learned within 90 and learned within 90 and learned within 120
updates to the Cyber
less than 120 calendar less than 120 calendar calendar days of a test
Security Incident
days of a test or actual days of a test or actual or actual incident
response plan within
incident response to a incident response to a response to a
greater than 90 but less
Reportable Cyber Reportable Cyber Reportable Cyber
than 120 calendar days
Security Incident. (3.1.2) Security Incident. (3.1.1) Security Incident. (3.1.1)
of a test or actual
OR OR
incident response to a
Reportable Cyber The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Security Incident. (3.1.3) has not notified each has not updated the
person or group with a Cyber Security Incident
defined role in the Cyber response plan based on
Security Incident any documented lessons
response plan of learned within 120
updates to the Cyber calendar days of a test
Security Incident or actual incident
response plan within response to a
120 calendar days of a Reportable Cyber
test or actual incident Security Incident. (3.1.2)
response to a
OR
Page 16 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Reportable Cyber The Responsible Entity
Security Incident. (3.1.3) has not updated the
Cyber Security Incident
OR
response plan(s) or
The Responsible Entity notified each person or
has not updated the group with a defined
Cyber Security Incident role within 90 calendar
response plan(s) or days of any of the
notified each person or following changes that
group with a defined the responsible entity
role within 60 and less determines would
than 90 calendar days of impact the ability to
any of the following execute the plan: (3.2)
changes that the
• Roles or
responsible entity
responsibilities, or
determines would
• Cyber Security
impact the ability to
Incident response
execute the plan: (3.2)
groups or individuals, or
• Roles or • Technology changes.
responsibilities, or
• Cyber Security
Incident response
groups or individuals, or
• Technology changes.
The Responsible Entity
R4 Operations Lower The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
notified E-ISAC and
Assessment failed to notify E-ISAC or notified E-ISAC and failed to notify E-ISAC
NCCIC, or their
NCCIC, or their NCCIC, or their and NCCIC, or their
successors, of a Cyber
successors, of a Cyber successors, of a successors, of a
Security Incident that
Security Incident that Reportable Cyber Reportable Cyber
was an attempt to
was an attempt to Security Incident but Security Incident. (R4)
compromise a system
compromise, as failed to notify or
identified in the
Page 17 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
“Applicable Systems” determined by applying update E-ISAC or NCCIC,
column for Part 4.2 but the criteria from or their successors,
failed to notify or Requirement R1, Part within the timelines
update E-ISAC or NCCIC, 1.2.1, a system pursuant to Part 4.2.
or their successors, identified in the (4.2)
within the timelines “Applicable Systems”
OR
pursuant to Part 4.2. column. (R4)
(4.2) The Responsible Entity
failed to notify E-ISAC or
OR
NCCIC, or their
The Responsible Entity
successors, of a
notified E-ISAC and
Reportable Cyber
NCCIC, or their
Security Incident. (R4)
successors, of a
Reportable Cyber
Security Incident or a
Cyber Security Incident
that was an attempt to
compromise a system
identified in the
“Applicable Systems”
column for Part 4.3 but
failed to report on one
or more of the
attributes within 7 days
after determination of
the attribute(s) not
reported pursuant to
Part 4.1. (4.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity
notified E-ISAC and
Page 18 of 20
CIP-008-6 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-6)
Time
R # VRF
Horizon
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
NCCIC, or their
successors, of a
Reportable Cyber
Security Incident or a
Cyber Security Incident
that was an attempt to
compromise a system
identified in the
“Applicable Systems”
column for Part 4.1 but
failed to report on one
or more of the
attributes after
determination pursuant
to Part 4.1. (4.1)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
Page 19 of 20
CIP-008-6 - Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control center.” 3/24/06
Modifications to clarify the requirements and to
bring the compliance elements into conformance
with the latest guidelines for developing compliance
elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
2 9/30/09
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a Responsible
Entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
Updated version number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence pertaining
3 to removing component or system from service in
order to perform testing, in response to FERC order
issued September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Asset
4 12/30/10 Update
identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP standards
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
and to revise
format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-008-5.
CIP-008-5
Requirement R2,
FERC Letter Order issued approving VRFs and VSLs VSL table under
5 7/9/14
revisions to certain CIP standards. Severe, changed
from 19 to 18
calendar months.
Modified to
address directives
6 2/7/2019 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
in FERC Order No.
848
FERC order issued approving CIP-008-6. Docket No.
6 6/20/2019
RD19-3-000
Page 20 of 20
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-008-6.pdf ---

