--- START DOCUMENT: cip-005-8.pdf ---
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
2. Number: CIP-005-8
3. Purpose: To protect BES Cyber Systems (BCS) against compromise by permitting
only known and controlled communication to reduce the likelihood of
misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
Page 1 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-005-8:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
Page 2 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to
one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BCS
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the
CIP-002 identification and categorization processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to define
the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Date: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan.”
Page 3 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Applicable Systems connected to a Examples of evidence may include, but is
network via a routable protocol must be not limited to, a list of all ESPs with all
Medium impact BCS and their associated
protected by an ESP. uniquely identifiable applicable Cyber
PCA
Systems connected via a routable protocol
within each ESP.
1.2 High impact BCS with ERC and their Permit only needed routable protocol Examples of evidence may include, but are
associated PCA communications, documenting the not limited to, documentation that
reason, and deny all other routable includes the configuration of system and
Medium impact BCS with ERC and their
protocol communications, through the documented reason, such as:
associated PCA
ESP; excluding time sensitive
• Electronic Access Point (EAP)
communications of Protection Systems.
configuration;
• Network infrastructure
configuration (e.g., technical
policies, ACL, VLAN, VXLAN, MPLS,
VRF, multi-context, or multi-
tenant environment); or
• SCI configuration or settings (e.g.,
technical policies, hypervisor,
fabric, back-plane, or SAN
configuration).
Page 4 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 SCI supporting an Applicable System from Protect ESP and SCI configurations by Examples of evidence may include, but are
Part 1.1. implementing methods to permit only not limited to, documentation of the
needed network accessibility to methods implemented to permit only
EACMS, and their supporting SCI, that
Management Interfaces of Applicable needed network accessibility to
control an ESP for an Applicable System in
Systems, per system capability. Management Interfaces, including
Part 1.1
documented reasons such as:
• Logical configuration or settings
(e.g., technical Policies, ACL, VLAN,
VXLAN, MPLS, VRF, multi-context,
or multi-tenant environment);
• Physically isolated or out-of-band
network for dedicated
Management Interfaces; or
• SCI configuration or settings
showing the isolation of the
Management Interfaces (e.g.,
technical policies, hypervisor, fabric
back-plane, or SAN configuration).
1.4 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Perform authentication when establishing Examples of evidence may include, but are
Dial-up Connectivity with Applicable not limited to, configuration, settings, or
Medium impact BCS and their associated
Systems, if any, and per system capability. documented process that describes how
PCA
the Responsible Entity is providing
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this authenticated access through each dial-up
Part connection.
1.5 High impact BCS Have one or more methods for detecting An example of evidence may include, but
known or suspected malicious routable is not limited to, documentation that
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers
protocol communications entering or malicious routable protocol
leaving an ESP. communications detection methods (e.g.,
intrusion detection system, application
layer firewall, etc.) are implemented.
Page 5 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-8 Table R1 – Electronic Security Perimeter
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.6 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Protect the data traversing Examples of evidence may include, but are
communication links used to span a single not limited to, documentation of methods
Medium impact BCS at Control Centers
ESP between PSPs through the use of: used to protect the confidentiality and
and their associated PCA
integrity of the data, such as:
• Confidentiality and integrity
controls, or • Configurations or settings used to
enforce encryption; or
• Physical controls that restrict
access to the cabling and other • The physical access restrictions
non-programmable (e.g., cabling and components
communication components in secured through conduit or
those instances when such cabling secured cable trays).
and components are located
outside of a PSP,
Excluding:
i. Real-time Assessment and
Real-time monitoring data
while being transmitted
between Control Centers
subject to CIP-012; and
ii. Time-sensitive communication
of Protection Systems.
Page 6 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts, per system capability, in CIP-005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management. [Violation Risk Factor:
Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M2. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively address each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the
Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Permit Interactive Remote Access (IRA), if Examples of evidence may include, but
any, only through an Intermediate are not limited to, network diagrams,
Medium impact BCS and their associated
System. architecture documents, configuration,
PCA
or settings that show all IRA is through an
SCI supporting an Applicable System in Intermediate System.
this Part
2.2 Intermediate System(s) used to access an Protect the confidentiality and integrity Examples of evidence may include, but
Applicable System in Part 2.1 of IRA communications between the are not limited to, architecture
initiating Cyber Asset or Virtual Cyber documents, configuration or settings
Asset and the Intermediate System. detailing where confidentiality and
integrity controls (e.g., encryption)
initiate and terminate.
2.3 Intermediate System(s) used to access an Require multi-factor authentication to Example of evidence may include, but are
Applicable System in Part 2.1 the Intermediate System for IRA not limited to, architecture documents,
communications between the initiating configuration or settings detailing the
Cyber Asset or Virtual Cyber Asset and authentication factors used.
the Intermediate System.
Examples of authenticators may include,
but are not limited to,
• Something the individual knows
such as passwords or PINs. This
does not include User ID;
Page 7 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
• Something the individual has
such as tokens, digital
certificates, or smart cards; or
• Something the individual is such
as fingerprints, iris scans, or
other biometric characteristics.
2.4 High impact BCS and their associated Have one or more methods for Examples of evidence may include,
PCA determining active vendor remote access but are not limited to, documentation
sessions (including IRA and system-to- of the methods used to determine
Medium impact BCS and their associated
system remote access). active vendor remote access,
PCA
including IRA and system-to-system
SCI supporting an Applicable System in remote access, such as:
this Part
• Methods for accessing logged or
monitoring information to
determine active vendor remote
access sessions;
• Methods for monitoring activity
(e.g., connection tables or rule hit
counters in a firewall, or user
activity monitoring) or open ports
(e.g., netstat or related commands
to display currently active ports)
to determine active system to
system remote access sessions; or
• Methods that control vendor
initiation of remote access such as
vendors calling and requesting a
second factor in order to initiate
remote access.
2.5 High impact BCS and their associated PCA Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include,
Page 8 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
CIP-005-8 Table R2 – Remote Access Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
disable active vendor remote access but are not limited to, documentation
Medium impact BCS and their associated
(including IRA and system-to-system of the methods(s) used to disable
PCA
remote access). active vendor remote access
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
• (including IRA and system-to-
this Part
system remote access).
2.6 Intermediate System(s) used to access an Prevent Intermediate System(s) from Examples of evidence may include, but
Applicable System in Part 2.1 sharing CPU resources and memory are not limited to, documentation that
resources with any part of a high or includes the following:
medium impact BCS or associated PCAs.
• Intermediate System architecture;
or
• Configuration or settings of each
Intermediate System and
supporting Cyber Systems.
2.7 Intermediate System(s) used to access an Routable protocol communications from Examples of evidence may include, but
Applicable System in Part 2.1 an Intermediate System to a high or are not limited to, documentation that
medium impact BCS or associated PCAs includes the following:
must be through an ESP.
• Network diagrams of Intermediate
Systems architecture;
or
• Configuration, settings, or policy
of the EAP which controls routable
protocol communications of IRA
through the ESP.
Page 9 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented processes that collectively include the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-005-8 Table R3 –Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS, PACS, and SCI. [Violation Risk
Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Same Day Operations].
M3. Evidence must include the documented processes that collectively address each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-
005-8 Table R3 – Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS, PACS, and SCI and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-005-8 Table R3 – Vendor Remote Access Management for EACMS, PACS, and SCI
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 EACMS and PACS associated with high Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include, but
impact BCS. determine authenticated vendor- are not limited to, documentation of the
initiated remote connections. methods used to determine
EACMS and PACS associated with
authenticated vendor-initiated remote
medium impact BCS with ERC.
connections, such as:
SCI supporting an Applicable System in
• Methods for accessing logged or
this Part .
monitoring information to
determine authenticated vendor-
initiated remote connections.
3.2 EACMS and PACS associated with high Have one or more method(s) to Examples of evidence may include, but
impact BCS. terminate authenticated vendor-initiated are not limited to, documentation of the
remote connections and control the methods(s) used to terminate
EACMS and PACS associated with
ability to reconnect. authenticated vendor-initiated remote
medium impact BCS with ERC.
connections to applicable
SCI supporting an Applicable System in systems. Examples include terminating
this Part. an active vendor-initiated
shell/process/session or dropping an
active vendor-initiated connection in a
firewall. Methods to control the ability to
reconnect, if necessary, could
be: disabling an Active Directory account;
disabling a security token; restricting IP
addresses from vendor sources in a
firewall; or physically disconnecting a
network cable to prevent a reconnection.
Page 10 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated
by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of
monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable
Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to
provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-time period
since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 11 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
have a method for detecting document one or more
known or suspected malicious processes for CIP-005-8 Table
routable protocol R1 – Electronic Security
communications entering or Perimeter. (R1)
leaving the ESP required by
OR
Part 1.5.
The Responsible Entity did not
OR
protect the Applicable Systems
The Responsible Entity did not connected to the network with
document the reason for routable protocol with an ESP.
permitting communications. (Part 1.1)
(Part 1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
permit only needed
communications and deny all
other communications,
through the ESP; excluding
time sensitive communications
of Protection Systems. (Part
1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
protect ESP and SCI
configurations by
implementing methods to
permit only needed network
accessibility to Management
Interfaces for Applicable
Page 12 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Systems per system capability.
(Part 1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
perform authentication when
establishing Dial-up
Connectivity with the
Applicable Systems. (Part 1.4)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
implement a method to
protect the data traversing
communication links, used to
span a single ESP between
PSPs, as required by Part 1.6.
R2. The Responsible Entity does The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
not have documented implement processes for one implement processes for two implement processes for three
processes for one or more of of the applicable Requirement of the applicable Requirement of the applicable Requirement
the applicable Requirement Parts 2.1 through 2.3. Parts 2.1 through 2.3. Parts 2.1 through 2.3.
Parts 2.1 through 2.3.
OR OR
The Responsible Entity did The Responsible Entity did
not have either: one or more not have one or more
method(s) for determining method(s) for determining
active vendor remote access active vendor remote access
sessions (including IRA and sessions (including IRA and
system-to-system remote system-to-system remote
access) (Part 2.4); or one or access) (Part 2.4) and one or
more methods to disable more methods to disable
active vendor remote access active vendor remote access
Page 13 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
(including IRA and system-to- (including IRA and system-to-
system remote access) (Part system remote access) (Part
2.5). 2.5).
OR
The Responsible Entity did
not prevent Intermediate
System(s) from sharing CPU
resources or memory
resources with any part of
a high or medium impact
BCS or associated PCAs.
(Part 2.6).
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
ensure routable protocol
communications from an
Intermediate System to high or
medium impact BCS or
associated PCAs went through
an ESP (Part 2.7).
R3. The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
document one or more have a method to determine implement processes for implement any processes for
processes for CIP-005-8 Table authenticated vendor-initiated either Part 3.1 or Part 3.2. CIP-005-8 Table R3 – Vendor
R3 – Vendor Remote Access remote connections for PACS (Requirement R3) Remote Access Management
Management for EACMS, or SCI supporting PACS (Part for EACMS, PACS, and SCI.
OR
PACS, and SCI. (Requirement 3.1). (Requirement R3)
R3) The Responsible Entity did not
OR OR
have a method to determine
authenticated vendor-initiated
Page 14 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity did not remote connections for The Responsible Entity did not
have a method to terminate EACMS or SCI supporting have any methods as required
authenticated vendor-initiated EACMS (Part 3.1). by Parts 3.1 and 3.2
remote connections for PACS (Requirement R3).
OR
or SCI supporting PACS (Part
3.2). The Responsible Entity did not
have a method to terminate
authenticated vendor-initiated
remote connections or control
the ability to reconnect for
EACMS or SCI supporting
EACMS (Part 3.2).
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-005-8 Technical Rationale
Page 15 of 16
CIP-005-8 — Cyber Security – Electronic Security Perimeter(s)
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and to
bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a responsible
entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated version number from -2 to -3
Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 12/30/10 Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Update
Asset identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with other
CIP standards and to
revise format to use
RBS Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-005-5.
6 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address
certain directives in
FERC Order No. 829.
6 10/18/2018 FERC Order approving CIP-005-6. Docket No.
RM17-13-000.
7 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address
directives in FERC
Order No. 850.
7 03/18/2021 FERC Order approving CIP-005-7. Docket No.
RD21-2-000
8 5/9/2024 Approved by the NERC Board of Virtualization
Modifications by
Trustees.
Project 2016-02
Page 16 of 16
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-005-8.pdf ---

