--- START DOCUMENT: cip-012-2.pdf ---
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
2. Number: CIP-012-2
3. Purpose: To protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of Real-time
Assessment and Real-time monitoring data transmitted between Control Centers.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: The requirements in this standard apply to the following
functional entities, referred to as “Responsible Entities,” that own or operate a
Control Center.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Generator Operator
4.1.3. Generator Owner
4.1.4. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.5. Transmission Operator
4.1.6. Transmission Owner
4.2. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Reliability Standard CIP-012-2:
4.2.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.2. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R.
Section 73.54.
4.2.3. A Control Center that transmits to another Control Center Real-time
Assessment or Real-time monitoring data pertaining only to the generation
resource or Transmission station or substation co-located with the
transmitting Control Center.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for CIP-012-2.
Page 1 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. The Responsible Entity shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or
more documented plan(s) to mitigate the risks posed by unauthorized disclosure,
unauthorized modification, and loss of availability, of data used in Real-time Assessment and
Real-time monitoring while such data is being transmitted between any applicable Control
Centers. The Responsible Entity is not required to include oral communications in its plan.
The plan shall include: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations
Planning]Identification of method(s) used to mitigate the risk(s) posed by unauthorized
disclosure and unauthorized modification of data used in Real-time Assessment and Real-
time monitoring while such data is being transmitted between Control Centers;
1.1. Identification of method(s) used to mitigate the risk(s) posed by unauthorized
disclosure and unauthorized modification of data used in Real-time Assessment and
Real-time monitoring while such data is being transmitted between Control Centers;
1.2. Identification of method(s) used to mitigate the risk(s) posed by the loss of the
ability to communicate Real-time Assessment and Real-time monitoring data
between Control Centers;
1.3. Identification of method(s) used to initiate the recovery of communication links used
to transmit Real-time Assessment and Real-time monitoring data between Control
Centers;
1.4. Identification of where the Responsible Entity implemented method(s)as required
in Parts 1.1 and 1.2; and
1.5. If the Control Centers are owned or operated by different Responsible Entities,
identification of the responsibilities of each Responsible Entity for implementing
method(s) as required in Parts 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3.
M1. Examples of evidence may include, but are not limited to, documented plan(s) that meet the
mitigation objective of Requirement R1 and documentation demonstrating the
implementation of the plan(s). Examples of methods identified in the plan(s) may include,
but are not limited to, one or more of the following for each Part:
Part 1.1
• Methods of mitigation used to protect against the unauthorized disclosure and
unauthorized modification of the data (e.g., data masking, encryption/decryption)
while such data is being transmitted between Control Centers
• Physical access restrictions to unencrypted portions of the network
Part 1.2
• Identification of alternative communication paths or methods between Control Centers
• Procedures explaining the use of alternative systems or methods for providing for the
availability of the data
• Service level agreements with carriers containing high availability provisions
Page 2 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
• Availability or uptime reports for equipment supporting the transmission of Real-time
Assessment and Real-time monitoring data
Part 1.3
• Contract, memorandum of understanding, meeting minutes, agreement or other
information outlining the methods used for recovery
• Methods for the recovery of links such as standard operating procedures, applicable
sections of CIP-009 recovery plan(s), or similar technical recovery plans
• Documentation of the process to restore assets and systems that provide
communications
• Process or procedure to contact a communications link vendor to initiate and or verify
restoration of service
Part 1.4
• Descriptions or logical diagrams indicating where the implemented methods reside
• Identification of points within the infrastructure where the implemented methods
reside
• Third party Agreements detailing where the methods are implemented if such methods
are implemented by the third party
Part 1.5
• Contract, memorandum of understanding, meeting minutes, agreement, or other
documentation outlining the responsibilities of each entity
Page 3 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC, the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring and/or
enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability Standards in their
respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period of
time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For
instances where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the
time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show
that it was compliant for the full-time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• The Responsible Entities shall keep data or evidence of each Requirement in this
Reliability Standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related
to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time
specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC Rules
of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers to the
identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or information for
the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated Reliability
Standard.
Page 4 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
documented its plan(s), documented its plan(s), failed to document its
but failed to include one but failed to include two plan(s) for Requirement
of the applicable Parts of of the applicable Parts of R1;
the plan as specified in the plan as specified in
OR
Requirement R1. Requirement R1.
The Responsible Entity
failed to implement three
or more Parts of its plan(s)
for Requirement R1,
except under CIP
Exceptional Circumstances.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan.
• Technical Rationale for CIP-012-2.
Page 5 of 6
CIP-012-2 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
Version History
Version Date Action Change
Tracking
1 Respond to FERC Order No. 822 New
1 August 16, 2018 Adopted by NERC Board of Trustees
1 January 23, 2020 FERC Order issued approving CIP-012-
1Docket No. RM18-20-000
Revised under
2 December 12, Adopted by NERC Board of Trustees
Project 2020-04
2023
2 May 23, 2024 FERC Order issued approving CIP-012-2
Docket No. RD24-3-000
Page 6 of 6
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-012-2.pdf ---

