--- START DOCUMENT: cip-002-8.pdf ---
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
2. Number: CIP-002-8
3. Purpose: To identify and categorize BES Cyber Systems (BCS) and their associated
BES Cyber Assets (BCA) for the application of cyber security requirements
commensurate with the adverse impact that loss, compromise, or misuse of those BCS
could have on the reliable operation of the Bulk Electric System (BES). Identification
and categorization of BCS support appropriate protection against compromises that
could lead to misoperation or instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein,
the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-002-8:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESPs).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends
to one or more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
5. Effective Dates: See Implementation Plan for CIP-002
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement a process that considers each of the
following assets for purposes of Parts 1.1 through 1.3: [Violation Risk Factor: High]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
i. Control Centers and backup Control Centers;
ii. Transmission stations and substations;
iii. Generation resources;
iv. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart
Resources and Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements;
v. RAS that support the reliable operation of the BES; and
vi. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability
section 4.2.1 above.
1.1. Identify each of the high impact BCS according to Attachment 1, Section 1, if
any, at each asset;
1.2. Identify each of the medium impact BCS according to Attachment 1, Section 2,
if any, at each asset; and
1.3. Identify each asset that contains a low impact BCS according to Attachment 1,
Section 3, if any (a discrete list of low impact BCS is not required).
M1. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, dated electronic or physical lists
required by Requirement R1.
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall: [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations
Planning]
2.1 Review the identifications in Requirement R1 and its parts (and update them if
there are changes identified) at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it
has no identified items in Requirement R1, and
2.2 Have its CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications required
by Requirement R1 at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it has no
identified items in Requirement R1.
M2. Acceptable evidence includes, but is not limited to, electronic or physical dated
records to demonstrate that the Responsible Entity has reviewed and updated, where
necessary, the identifications required in Requirement R1 and its parts, and has had its
CIP Senior Manager or delegate approve the identifications required in Requirement
R1 and its parts at least once every 15 calendar months, even if it has none identified
in Requirement R1 and its parts, as required by Requirement R2.
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
“Compliance Enforcement Authority” means NERC or the Regional Entity in their
respective roles of monitoring and enforcing compliance with the NERC
Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention period(s) identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances
where the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time
since the last audit, the Compliance Enforcement Authority may ask an entity to
provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time period
since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its Compliance Enforcement Authority to
retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program:
“Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” or “CMEP” means, depending on
the context (1) the NERC Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program (Appendix
4C to the NERC Rules of Procedure) or the Commission-approved program of a Regional
Entity, as applicable, or (2) the program, department or organization within NERC or a
Regional Entity that is responsible for performing compliance monitoring and
enforcement activities with respect to Registered Entities’ compliance with Reliability
Standards.
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
Violation Severity Levels
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-8)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with
more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES more than a total of 40 BES
assets in Requirement R1, five assets in Requirement R1, more assets in Requirement R1, assets in Requirement R1,
percent or fewer BES assets have than five percent, but less than more than 10 percent, but less more than 15 percent of BES
not been considered according or equal to 10 percent of BES than or equal to 15 percent of assets have not been
to Requirement R1; assets have not been BES assets have not been considered, according to
considered, according to considered, according to Requirement R1;
OR
Requirement R1; Requirement R1;
OR
For Responsible Entities with a
OR OR
total of 40 or fewer BES assets, 2 For Responsible Entities with a
or fewer BES assets in For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a total of 40 or fewer BES assets,
Requirement R1, have not been total of 40 or fewer BES assets, total of 40 or fewer BES assets, more than six BES assets in
considered according to more than two, but fewer than more than four, but fewer than Requirement R1, have not
Requirement R1; or equal to four BES assets in or equal to six BES assets in been considered according to
Requirement R1, have not been Requirement R1, have not Requirement R1;
OR
considered according to been considered according to
OR
For Responsible Entities with Requirement R1; Requirement R1;
more than a total of 100 high For Responsible Entities with
OR OR
and medium impact BCS, five more than a total of 100 high
percent or fewer of identified For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with and medium impact BCS, more
BCS have not been categorized more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high than 15 percent of identified
or have been incorrectly and medium impact BCS, more or medium impact BCS, more BCS have not been categorized
categorized at a lower category; than five percent, but less than than 10 percent, but less than or have been incorrectly
or equal to 10 percent of or equal to 15 percent of categorized at a lower
OR
identified BCS have not been identified BCS have not been category;
For Responsible Entities with a categorized or have been categorized or have been
OR
total of 100 or fewer high and incorrectly categorized at a incorrectly categorized at a
medium impact BCS, five or lower category; lower category; For Responsible Entities with a
fewer identified BCS have not total of 100 or fewer high and
OR OR
been categorized or have been medium impact BCS, more
incorrectly categorized at a For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a than 15 identified BCS have
lower category. total of 100 or fewer high and total of 100 or fewer high or not been categorized or have
medium impact BCS, more than medium impact BCS, more been incorrectly categorized at
OR
Page 6 of 12
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-8)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
five, but less than or equal to 10 than 10, but less than or equal a lower category.
For Responsible Entities with
identified BES Cyber Systems to 15 identified BCS have not
more than a total of 100 high OR
have not been categorized or been categorized or have been
and medium impact BCS, five
have been incorrectly incorrectly categorized at a For Responsible Entities with
percent or fewer high or medium
categorized at a lower category. lower category. more than a total of 100 high
BCS have not been identified;
and medium impact BCS, more
OR OR
OR than 15 percent of high or
For Responsible Entities with For Responsible Entities with medium impact BCS have not
For Responsible Entities with a
more than a total of 100 high more than a total of 100 high been identified;
total of 100 or fewer high and
and medium impact BCS, more and medium impact BCS, more
medium impact BCS, five or OR
than five percent, but less than than 10 percent, but less than
fewer high or medium BCS have
or equal to 10 percent high or or equal to 15 percent high or For Responsible Entities with a
not been identified.
medium BCS have not been medium BCS have not been total of 100 or fewer high and
identified; identified; medium impact BES Cyber
Systems, more than 15 high or
OR OR
medium impact BCS have not
For Responsible Entities with a For Responsible Entities with a been identified.
total of 100 or fewer high and total of 100 or fewer high and
medium impact BCS, more than medium impact BCS, more
five, but less than or equal to 10 than 10, but less than or equal
high or medium BCS have not to 15 high or medium BCS have
been identified. not been identified.
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
complete its review and update complete its review and update complete its review and update complete its review and update
for the identification required for the identification required for the identification required for the identification required
for Requirement R1 within 15 for Requirement R1 within 16 for Requirement R1 within 17 for Requirement R1 within 18
calendar months, but less than calendar months, but less than calendar months, but less than calendar months of the
or equal to 16 calendar months or equal to 17 calendar months or equal to 18 calendar months previous review. (Part 2.1)
of the previous review. (Part of the previous review. of the previous review. (Part
OR
2.1) (Part2.1) 2.1)
The Responsible Entity failed to
OR OR OR
complete its approval of the
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity failed to The Responsible Entity failed to identifications required by
complete its approval of the complete its approval of the complete its approval of the Requirement R1 by the CIP
identifications required by identifications required by identifications required by Senior Manager or delegate
Page 7 of 12
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
R # Violation Severity Levels (CIP-002-8)
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP Requirement R1 by the CIP according to Requirement R2
Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate Senior Manager or delegate within 18 calendar months of
according to Requirement R2 according to Requirement R2 according to Requirement R2 the previous approval. (Part
within 15 calendar months, but within 16 calendar months, but within 17 calendar months, but 2.2)
less than or equal to 16 less than or equal to 17 less than or equal to 18
calendar months of the calendar months of the calendar months of the
previous approval. (Part 2.2) previous approval. (Part 2.2) previous approval. (Part 2.2)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2021-03
• CIP-002-8 Technical Rationale
Page 8 of 12
CIP-002-8 — Cyber Security — BES Cyber System Categorization
Version History
Change
Version Date Action
Tracking
1 1/16/06 R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control 3/24/06
center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements and to
bring the compliance elements into conformance
with the latest guidelines for developing
compliance elements of standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a Responsible
Entity. Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated version number from -2 to -3. Update
Approved by the NERC Board of
Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 12/30/10 Modified to add specific criteria for Critical Asset Update
identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board Trustees. Modified to coordinate
with other CIP standards
and to revise format to
use RBS Template.
5.1 9/30/13 Replaced “Devices” with “Systems” in a definition Errata
in background section.
5.1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-002-5.1.
5.1a 11/02/16 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5.1a 12/14/2016 FERC letter Order approving CIP-002-5.1a.
Docket No. RD17-2-000.
6 5/14/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified Criterion 2.12
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees Virtualization Modifications
under Project 2016-02
8 12/10/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees Transmission Owners
Control Centers Updates
under Project 2021-03
Page 9 of 12
Attachment 1
Attachment 1 – Impact Rating Criteria
Impact Rating Criteria
The criteria defined in Attachment 1 do not constitute stand-alone compliance requirements, but
are criteria characterizing the level of impact and are referenced by requirements.
1. High impact rating
Each BCS used by and located at any of the following:
1.1. For Reliability Coordinators, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Reliability Coordinator.
1.2. For Balancing Authorities, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Balancing Authority for: 1) generation equal to or
greater than an aggregate of 3000 MW in a single Interconnection, or 2) one or more of
the assets that meet criterion 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
1.3. For Transmission Operators and Transmission Owners, each Control Center or backup
Control Center for one or more of the assets that meet criterion 2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7, 2.8,
2.9, or 2.10.
1.4 For Generator Operators, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Generator Operator for one or more of the assets
that meet criterion 2.1, 2.3, 2.6, or 2.9.
2. Medium impact rating
Each BCS, not included in Section 1 above, associated with any of the following:
2.1. Commissioned generation, by each group of generating units at a single plant location,
with an aggregate highest rated net Real Power capability of the preceding 12 calendar
months equal to or exceeding 1500 MW in a single Interconnection. For each group of
generating units, the only BCS that meet this criterion are each discrete shared BCS that
could, within 15 minutes, adversely impact the reliable operation of any combination of
units that in aggregate equal or exceed 1500 MW in a single Interconnection.
2.2. Each BES reactive resource or group of resources at a single location (excluding
generation Facilities) with an aggregate maximum Reactive Power nameplate rating of
1000 MVAR or greater (excluding those at generation Facilities). The only BCS that
meet this criterion are each discrete shared BCS that could, within 15 minutes,
adversely impact the reliable operation of any combination of resources that in
aggregate equal or exceed 1000 MVAR.
2.3. Each generation Facility that its Planning Coordinator or Transmission Planner
designates, and informs the Generator Owner or Generator Operator, as necessary to
avoid an Adverse Reliability Impact in the planning horizon of more than one year.
2.4. Transmission Facilities operated at 500 kV or higher. For the purpose of this criterion,
the collector bus for a generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is
part of the generation interconnection Facility.
2.5. Transmission Facilities that are operating between 200 kV and 499 kV at a single station
or substation, where the station or substation is connected at 200 kV or higher voltages
to three or more other Transmission stations or substations and has an "aggregate weighted
Page 10 of 12
Attachment 1
value" exceeding 3000 according to the table below. The "aggregate weighted value" for a
single station or substation is determined by summing the "weight value per line" shown in the
table below for each incoming and each outgoing BES Transmission Line that is connected to
another Transmission station or substation. For the purpose of this criterion, the collector bus
for a generation plant is not considered a Transmission Facility, but is part of the generation
interconnection Facility.
Voltage Value of a Line Weight Value per Line
less than 200 kV (not applicable) (not applicable)
200 kV to 299 kV 700
300 kV to 499 kV 1300
500 kV and above 0 (N/A)
2.6. Generation at a single plant location or Transmission Facilities at a single station or
substation location that are identified by its Reliability Coordinator, Planning
Coordinator, or Transmission Planner as critical to the derivation of Interconnection
Reliability Operating Limits (IROLs) and their associated contingencies.
2.7. Transmission Facilities identified as essential to meeting Nuclear Plant Interface
Requirements.
2.8. Transmission Facilities, including generation interconnection Facilities, providing the
generation interconnection required to connect generator output to the Transmission
Systems that, if destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable,
would result in the loss of the generation Facilities identified by any Generator Owner
as a result of its application of Attachment 1, criterion 2.1 or 2.3.
2.9. Each RAS or automated switching System that operates BES Elements, that, if
destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable, would cause one or
more IROLs violations for failure to operate as designed or cause a reduction in one or
more IROLs if destroyed, degraded, misused, or otherwise rendered unavailable.
2.10. Each system or group of Elements that performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system, without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or more
implementing UVLS or UFLS under a load shedding program that is subject to one or
more requirements in a NERC or regional reliability standard.
2.11. For Generator Operators, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Generator Operator for an aggregate highest rated
net Real Power capability of the preceding 12 calendar months equal to or exceeding
1500 MW in a single Interconnection.
2.12. For Transmission Operators and Transmission Owners, each Control Center or backup
Control Center with an “aggregate weighted value” exceeding 6000 according to the
table below and subject to the listed exclusion. The “aggregate weighted value” for a
Control Center or backup Control Center is determined by summing the “weight value
per BES Transmission Line,” shown in the table below, for lines that are monitored and
controlled by the Control Center or backup Control Center. Include each BES Transmission Line
that is connected between two or more Transmission stations or substations.
Page 11 of 12
Attachment 1
Voltage Value of a BES Weight Value per BES
Transmission Line Transmission Line
<100 kV 100
100 kV to 199 kV 250
200 kV to 299 kV 700
300 kV to 499 kV 1300
500 kV and above 0 (N/A)
Exclusion:
Provided that the “aggregate weighted value” calculated according to the table above
is less than 12000, a Transmission Operator or a Transmission Owner may exclude the
BES Transmission Lines that are contained in a single group of contiguous Elements
from their “aggregate weighted value” calculation, where a group of contiguous
Elements is defined as:
• a group of contiguous Elements emanating from multiple points of
connection at 69 kV or higher;
• that are operated at less than 300 kV; and
• where the gross export does not exceed 75 MWh during non-Energy
Emergency Alert conditions. The gross export is based on the hourly
integrated values of the preceding 12 calendar months.
2.13. For Balancing Authorities, each Control Center or backup Control Center used to
perform the reliability tasks of the Balancing Authority for generation equal to or
greater than an aggregate of 1500 MW in a single Interconnection.
3. Low impact rating
BCS not included in Sections 1 or 2 above that are associated with any of the following assets
and that meet the applicability qualifications in Section 4 - Applicability, part 4.2 – Facilities,
of this standard:
3.1. Control Centers and backup Control Centers.
3.2. Transmission stations and substations.
3.3. Generation resources.
3.4. Systems and facilities critical to system restoration, including Blackstart Resources and
Cranking Paths and initial switching requirements.
3.5. RAS that support the reliable operation of the BES.
3.6. For Distribution Providers, Protection Systems specified in Applicability section 4.2.1
above.
Page 12 of 12
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-002-8.pdf ---

