--- START DOCUMENT: cip-010-4.pdf ---
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability
Assessments
2. Number: CIP-010-4
3. Purpose: To prevent and detect unauthorized changes to BES Cyber Systems by
specifying configuration change management and vulnerability assessment
requirements in support of protecting BES Cyber Systems from compromise that could
lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric System (BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3. Generator Operator
Page 1 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section
4.1 above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For
requirements in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or
equipment or subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these
are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-010-4:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
Page 2 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
4.2.3.2. Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters.
4.2.3.3. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.5. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03.
6. Background: Standard CIP-010 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to
cyber security, which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber
Systems and require a minimum level of organizational, operational and procedural
controls to mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements.
An entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented processes,
but it must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident
response plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an
approach involving multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans, and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the
standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training
program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be
referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any
additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Page 3 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented processes.
These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records of
compliance and should not be viewed as an all-inclusive list.
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the BES. A
review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability standards for UFLS
program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of 300 MW
represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of
systems to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this
concept from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk
Management Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately
based on impact and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used
in the applicability column as described.
• High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization processes.
• Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized
as medium impact according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
• Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced
high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples
may include, but are not limited to, firewalls, authentication servers, and log
monitoring and alerting systems.
Page 4 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
• Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access
Control System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or
medium impact BES Cyber System with External Routable Connectivity.
• Protected Cyber Assets (PCA) – Applies to each Protected Cyber Asset
associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact
BES Cyber System.
Page 5 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium]
[Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Develop a baseline configuration, Examples of evidence may include, but are
associated: individually or by group, which shall include not limited to:
1. EACMS; the following items: • A spreadsheet identifying the required
1.1.1. Operating system(s) (including items of the baseline configuration for
2. PACS; and
version) or firmware where no each Cyber Asset, individually or by
3. PCA
independent operating system group; or
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
exists;
their associated: • A record in an asset management
1.1.2. Any commercially available or system that identifies the required
1. EACMS;
open-source application software items of the baseline configuration for
2. PACS; and
(including version) intentionally each Cyber Asset, individually or by
3. PCA
installed; group.
1.1.3. Any custom software installed;
1.1.4. Any logical network accessible
ports; and
1.1.5. Any security patches applied.
1.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Authorize and document changes that Examples of evidence may include, but are
associated: deviate from the existing baseline not limited to:
1. EACMS; configuration. • A change request record and
2. PACS; and associated electronic authorization
3. PCA (performed by the individual or group
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and with the authority to authorize the
their associated: change) in a change management
Page 6 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1. EACMS; system for each change; or
2. PACS; and • Documentation that the change was
3. PCA performed in accordance with the
requirement.
1.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their For a change that deviates from the An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: existing baseline configuration, update the not limited to, updated baseline
baseline configuration as necessary within documentation with a date that is within
1. EACMS;
30 calendar days of completing the change. 30 calendar days of the date of the
2. PACS; and
completion of the change.
3. PCA
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
their associated:
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and
3. PCA
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their For a change that deviates from the An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: existing baseline configuration: not limited to, a list of cyber security
1. EACMS; 1.4.1. Prior to the change, determine controls verified or tested along with the
2. PACS; and required cyber security controls in dated test results.
3. PCA CIP-005 and CIP-007 that could be
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and impacted by the change;
their associated: 1.4.2. Following the change, verify that
required cyber security controls
1. EACMS;
determined in 1.4.1 are not
2. PACS; and
adversely affected; and
3. PCA
1.4.3. Document the results of the
verification.
Where technically feasible, for each change
1.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems An example of evidence may include, but is
that deviates from the existing baseline
not limited to, a list of cyber security
configuration: controls tested along with successful test
1.5.1. Prior to implementing any change results and a list of differences between
in the production environment, the production and test environments with
Page 7 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
test the changes in a test descriptions of how any differences were
environment or test the changes in accounted for, including the date of the
a production environment where test.
the test is performed in a manner
that minimizes adverse effects, that
models the baseline configuration
to ensure that required cyber
security controls in CIP-005 and
CIP-007 are not adversely affected;
and
1.5.2. Document the results of the testing
and, if a test environment was
used, the differences between the
test environment and the
production environment, including
a description of the measures used
to account for any differences in
operation between the test and
production environments.
1.6 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Prior to a change that deviates from the An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: existing baseline configuration associated not limited to a change request record that
with baseline items in Parts 1.1.1, 1.1.2, demonstrates the verification of identity of
1. EACMS; and
and 1.1.5, and when the method to do so is the software source and integrity of the
2. PACS
available to the Responsible Entity from the software was performed prior to the
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
software source: baseline change or a process which
their associated:
1.6.1. Verify the identity of the software documents the mechanisms in place that
1. EACMS; and
would automatically ensure the identity of
source; and
2. PACS
the software source and integrity of the
1.6.2. Verify the integrity of the software
Note: Implementation does not require
software.
obtained from the software source.
the Responsible Entity to renegotiate or
abrogate existing contracts (including
amendments to master agreements and
purchase orders). Additionally, the
Page 8 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
following issues are beyond the scope of
Part 1.6: (1) the actual terms and
conditions of a procurement contract; and
(2) vendor performance and adherence to
a contract.
Page 9 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-4 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Operations Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-4 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-4 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Monitor at least once every 35 calendar An example of evidence may include, but
associated: days for changes to the baseline is not limited to, logs from a system that is
1. EACMS; and configuration (as described in Requirement monitoring the configuration along with
R1, Part 1.1). Document and investigate records of investigation for any
2. PCA
detected unauthorized changes. unauthorized changes that were detected.
Page 10 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-3 Table R3– Vulnerability Assessments. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long-term Planning and Operations Planning]
M3. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-3 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-4 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their At least once every 15 calendar months, Examples of evidence may include, but
associated: conduct a paper or active vulnerability are not limited to:
1. EACMS; assessment.
• A document listing the date of the
2. PACS; and
assessment (performed at least once
3. PCA
every 15 calendar months), the
controls assessed for each BES Cyber
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and
System along with the method of
their associated:
assessment; or
1. EACMS;
2. PACS; and • A document listing the date of the
assessment and the output of any
3. PCA
tools used to perform the
assessment.
Page 11 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems Where technically feasible, at least once An example of evidence may include, but
every 36 calendar months: is not limited to, a document listing the
date of the assessment (performed at
3.2.1 Perform an active vulnerability
least once every 36 calendar months), the
assessment in a test environment,
output of the tools used to perform the
or perform an active vulnerability
assessment, and a list of differences
assessment in a production
between the production and test
environment where the test is
environments with descriptions of how
performed in a manner that
any differences were accounted for in
minimizes adverse effects, that
conducting the assessment.
models the baseline configuration
of the BES Cyber System in a
production environment; and
3.2.2 Document the results of the
testing and, if a test environment
was used, the differences
between the test environment
and the production environment,
including a description of the
measures used to account for any
differences in operation between
the test and production
environments.
Page 12 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Prior to adding a new applicable Cyber An example of evidence may include, but
associated: Asset to a production environment, is not limited to, a document listing the
1. EACMS; and perform an active vulnerability date of the assessment (performed prior
assessment of the new Cyber Asset, to the commissioning of the new Cyber
2. PCA
except for CIP Exceptional Circumstances Asset) and the output of any tools used to
and like replacements of the same type of perform the assessment.
Cyber Asset with a baseline configuration
that models an existing baseline
configuration of the previous or other
existing Cyber Asset.
3.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Document the results of the assessments An example of evidence may include, but
associated: conducted according to Parts 3.1, 3.2, and is not limited to, a document listing the
1. EACMS; 3.3 and the action plan to remediate or results or the review or assessment, a list
mitigate vulnerabilities identified in the of action items, documented proposed
2. PACS; and
assessments including the planned date of dates of completion for the action plan,
3. PCA
completing the action plan and the and records of the status of the action
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems and execution status of any remediation or items (such as minutes of a status
their associated: mitigation action items. meeting, updates in a work order system,
1. EACMS; or a spreadsheet tracking the action
2. PACS; and items).
3. PCA
Page 13 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R4. Each Responsible Entity, for its high impact and medium impact BES Cyber Systems and associated Protected Cyber Assets,
shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or more documented plan(s) for Transient Cyber Assets
and Removable Media that include the sections in Attachment 1. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Long-term
Planning and Operations Planning]
M4. Evidence shall include each of the documented plan(s) for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media that collectively
include each of the applicable sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation of plan(s)
for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media. Additional examples of evidence per section are located in Attachment
2. If a Responsible Entity does not use Transient Cyber Asset(s) or Removable Media, examples of evidence include, but are
not limited to, a statement, policy, or other document that states the Responsible Entity does not use Transient Cyber
Asset(s) or Removable Media.
Page 14 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated
by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of
monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable
Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to
provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-time period
since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 15 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1. The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has not
documented and implemented documented and implemented documented and implemented documented or implemented
a configuration change a configuration change a configuration change any configuration change
management process(es) that management process(es) that management process(es) that management process(es). (R1)
includes only four of the includes only three of the includes only two of the
OR
required baseline items listed required baseline items listed required baseline items listed
The Responsible Entity has
in 1.1.1 through 1.1.5. (1.1) in 1.1.1 through 1.1.5. (1.1) in 1.1.1 through 1.1.5. (1.1)
documented and implemented
OR
a configuration change
The Responsible Entity has a management process(es) that
process as specified in Part 1.6 includes only one of the
to verify the identity of the required baseline items listed
software source (1.6.1) but in 1.1.1 through 1.1.5. (1.1)
does not have a process as
OR
specified in Part 1.6 to verify
The Responsible Entity does
the integrity of the software
not have a process(es) that
provided by the software
requires authorization and
source when the method to do
documentation of changes
so is available to the
that deviate from the existing
Responsible Entity from the
baseline configuration. (1.2)
software source. (1.6.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process(es) to
update baseline configurations
within 30 calendar days of
completing a change(s) that
deviates from the existing
baseline configuration.(1.3)
OR
Page 16 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process(es) to
determine required security
controls in CIP-005 and CIP-
007 that could be impacted by
a change(s) that deviates from
the existing baseline
configuration. (1.4.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity has a
process(es) to determine
required security controls in
CIP-005 and CIP-007 that could
be impacted by a change(s)
that deviates from the existing
baseline configuration but did
not verify and document that
the required controls were not
adversely affected following
the change. (1.4.2 & 1.4.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process for testing
changes in an environment
that models the baseline
configuration prior to
implementing a change that
deviates from baseline
configuration. (1.5.1)
OR
Page 17 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process to
document the test results and,
if using a test environment,
document the differences
between the test and
production environments.
(1.5.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity does
not have a process as specified
in Part 1.6 to verify the identity
of the software source and the
integrity of the software
provided by the software
source when the method to do
so is available to the
Responsible Entity from the
software source. (1.6)
R2. N/A N/A N/A The Responsible Entity has not
documented or implemented a
process(es) to monitor for,
investigate, and document
detected unauthorized
changes to the baseline at
least once every 35 calendar
days. (2.1)
R3. The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has not
implemented one or more implemented one or more implemented one or more implemented any vulnerability
documented vulnerability documented vulnerability documented vulnerability assessment processes for one
assessment processes for each assessment processes for each assessment processes for each
Page 18 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
of its applicable BES Cyber of its applicable BES Cyber of its applicable BES Cyber of its applicable BES Cyber
Systems, but has performed a Systems, but has performed a Systems, but has performed a Systems. (R3)
vulnerability assessment more vulnerability assessment more vulnerability assessment more
OR
than 15 months, but less than than 18 months, but less than than 21 months, but less than
The Responsible Entity has
18 months, since the last 21 months, since the last 24 months, since the last
implemented one or more
assessment on one of its assessment on one of its assessment on one of its
documented vulnerability
applicable BES Cyber Systems. applicable BES Cyber Systems. applicable BES Cyber Systems.
assessment processes for each
(3.1) (3.1) (3.1)
of its applicable BES Cyber
OR OR OR
Systems, but has performed a
The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has The Responsible Entity has vulnerability assessment more
implemented one or more implemented one or more implemented one or more than 24 months since the last
documented active documented active documented active assessment on one of its
vulnerability assessment vulnerability assessment vulnerability assessment applicable BES Cyber Systems.
processes for Applicable processes for Applicable processes for Applicable (3.1)
Systems, but has performed an Systems, but has performed an Systems, but has performed an
OR
active vulnerability assessment active vulnerability assessment active vulnerability assessment
The Responsible Entity has
more than 36 months, but less more than 39 months, but less more than 42 months, but less
implemented one or more
than 39 months, since the last than 42 months, since the last than 45 months, since the last
documented active
active assessment on one of its active assessment on one of its active assessment on one of its
vulnerability assessment
applicable BES Cyber Systems. applicable BES Cyber Systems. applicable BES Cyber Systems.
processes for Applicable
(3.2) (3.2) (3.2)
Systems, but has performed an
active vulnerability assessment
more than 45 months since the
last active assessment on one
of its applicable BES Cyber
Systems.(3.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
implemented and
documented one or more
vulnerability assessment
Page 19 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
processes for each of its
applicable BES Cyber Systems,
but did not perform the active
vulnerability assessment in a
manner that models an
existing baseline configuration
of its applicable BES Cyber
Systems. (3.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
implemented one or more
documented vulnerability
assessment processes for each
of its applicable BES Cyber
Systems, but has not
documented the results of the
vulnerability assessments, the
action plans to remediate or
mitigate vulnerabilities
identified in the assessments,
the planned date of
completion of the action plan,
and the execution status of the
mitigation plans. (3.4)
R4. The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity failed
documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for to document or implement
Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and one or more plan(s) for
Removable Media, but failed Removable Media, but failed Removable Media, but failed Transient Cyber Assets and
to manage its Transient Cyber to implement the Removable to authorize its Transient Removable Media according to
Asset(s) according to CIP-010- Media sections according to Cyber Asset(s) according to CIP-010-4, Requirement R4.
(R4)
Page 20 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
4, Requirement R4, CIP-010-4, Requirement R4, CIP-010-4, Requirement R4,
Attachment 1, Section 1.1. (R4) Attachment 1, Section 3. (R4) Attachment 1, Section 1.2. (R4)
OR OR OR
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for
Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and
Removable Media, but failed Removable Media plan, but Removable Media, but failed
to document the Removable failed to document mitigation to implement mitigation of
Media sections according to of software vulnerabilities, software vulnerabilities,
CIP-010-4, Requirement R4, mitigation for the introduction mitigation for the introduction
Attachment 1, Section 3. (R4) of malicious code, or of malicious code, or
mitigation of the risk of mitigation of the risk of
OR
unauthorized use for Transient unauthorized use for Transient
The Responsible Entity
Cyber Assets managed by the Cyber Assets managed by the
documented its plan(s) for
Responsible Entity according to Responsible Entity according to
Transient Cyber Assets and
CIP-010-4, Requirement R4, CIP-010-4, Requirement R4,
Removable Media, but failed
Attachment 1, Sections 1.3, Attachment 1, Sections 1.3,
to document authorization for
1.4, and 1.5. (R4) 1.4, and 1.5. (R4)
Transient Cyber Assets
OR OR
managed by the Responsible
Entity according to CIP-010-4, The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Requirement R4, Attachment documented its plan(s) for documented its plan(s) for
1, Section 1.2. (R4) Transient Cyber Assets and Transient Cyber Assets and
Removable Media, but failed Removable Media, but failed
to document mitigation of to implement mitigation of
software vulnerabilities or software vulnerabilities or
mitigation for the introduction mitigation for the introduction
of malicious code for Transient of malicious code for Transient
Cyber Assets managed by a Cyber Assets managed by a
party other than the party other than the
Responsible Entity according to Responsible Entity according to
CIP-010-4, Requirement R4, CIP-010-4, Requirement R4,
Page 21 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Attachment 1, Sections 2.1, Attachment 1, Sections 2.1,
2.2, and 2.3. (R4) 2.2, and 2.3. (R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2019-03.
• CIP-010-4 Technical Rationale
Page 22 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Developed to define the
configuration change
management and
vulnerability assessment
requirements in
coordination with other CIP
standards and to address
the balance of the FERC
directives in its Order 706.
1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-010-1.
(Order becomes effective on 2/3/14.)
2 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two FERC
directives from Order No.
791 related to identify,
assess, and correct language
and communication
networks.
2 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the version
adopted by the Board on
11/13/2014. Revised version
addresses remaining
directives from Order No.
791 related to transient
devices and low impact BES
Cyber Systems.
2 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-010-3.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
3 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address certain
directives in FERC Order No.
829.
3 10/18/2018 FERC Order approving CIP-010-3. Docket
No. RM17-13-000.
4 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address
directives in FERC Order No.
850.
4 3/18/2021 FERC order approving Docket No. RD21-
2-000
Page 23 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 - Attachment 1
Required Sections for Plans for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in their plan(s) for
Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media as required under Requirement R4.
Section 1. Transient Cyber Asset(s) Managed by the Responsible Entity.
1.1. Transient Cyber Asset Management: Responsible Entities shall manage
Transient Cyber Asset(s), individually or by group: (1) in an ongoing manner
to ensure compliance with applicable requirements at all times, (2) in an on-
demand manner applying the applicable requirements before connection to
a BES Cyber System, or (3) a combination of both (1) and (2) above.
1.2. Transient Cyber Asset Authorization: For each individual or group of
Transient Cyber Asset(s), each Responsible Entity shall authorize:
1.2.1. Users, either individually or by group or role;
1.2.2. Locations, either individually or by group; and
1.2.3. Uses, which shall be limited to what is necessary to perform business
functions.
1.3. Software Vulnerability Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the following
methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of vulnerabilities
posed by unpatched software on the Transient Cyber Asset (per Transient
Cyber Asset capability):
• Security patching, including manual or managed updates;
• Live operating system and software executable only from read-only
media;
• System hardening; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities.
1.4. Introduction of Malicious Code Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the introduction of
malicious code (per Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
1.5. Unauthorized Use Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the following
methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of unauthorized use
of Transient Cyber Asset(s):
Page 24 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
• Restrict physical access;
• Full-disk encryption with authentication;
• Multi-factor authentication; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the risk of unauthorized use.
Section 2. Transient Cyber Asset(s) Managed by a Party Other than the Responsible Entity.
2.1. Software Vulnerabilities Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of
vulnerabilities posed by unpatched software on the Transient Cyber Asset
(per Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Review of installed security patch(es);
• Review of security patching process used by the party;
• Review of other vulnerability mitigation performed by the party; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities.
2.2. Introduction of malicious code mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating malicious code (per
Transient Cyber Asset capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review use of live operating system and software executable only from
read-only media;
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate malicious code.
2.3. For any method used to mitigate software vulnerabilities or malicious code
as specified in 2.1 and 2.2, Responsible Entities shall determine whether any
additional mitigation actions are necessary and implement such actions prior
to connecting the Transient Cyber Asset.
Section 3. Removable Media
3.1. Removable Media Authorization: For each individual or group of Removable
Media, each Responsible Entity shall authorize:
3.1.1. Users, either individually or by group or role; and
3.1.2. Locations, either individually or by group.
3.2. Malicious Code Mitigation: To achieve the objective of mitigating the threat
of introducing malicious code to high impact or medium impact BES Cyber
Page 25 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Systems and their associated Protected Cyber Assets, each Responsible Entity
shall:
3.2.1. Use method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media using a
Cyber Asset other than a BES Cyber System or Protected Cyber Assets;
and
3.2.2. Mitigate the threat of detected malicious code on Removable Media
prior to connecting the Removable Media to a high impact or medium
impact BES Cyber System or associated Protected Cyber Assets.
Page 26 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-4 - Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Plans for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media
Section 1.1: Examples of evidence for Section 1.1 may include, but are not limited to, the
method(s) of management for the Transient Cyber Asset(s). This can be included
as part of the Transient Cyber Asset plan(s), part of the documentation related to
authorization of Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by the Responsible Entity or
part of a security policy.
Section 1.2: Examples of evidence for Section 1.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from asset management systems, human resource management
systems, or forms or spreadsheets that show authorization of Transient Cyber
Asset(s) managed by the Responsible Entity. Alternatively, this can be
documented in the overarching plan document.
Section 1.3: Examples of evidence for Section 1.3 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate software vulnerabilities posed
by unpatched software such as security patch management implementation, the
use of live operating systems from read-only media, system hardening practices
or other method(s) to mitigate the software vulnerability posed by unpatched
software. Evidence can be from change management systems, automated patch
management solutions, procedures or processes associated with using live
operating systems, or procedures or processes associated with system hardening
practices. If a Transient Cyber Asset does not have the capability to use method(s)
that mitigate the risk from unpatched software, evidence may include
documentation by the vendor or Responsible Entity that identifies that the
Transient Cyber Asset does not have the capability.
Section 1.4: Examples of evidence for Section 1.4 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious
code such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern
updates, application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication,
or other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a Transient
Cyber Asset does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the
introduction of malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the
vendor or Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset does
not have the capability.
Section 1.5: Examples of evidence for Section 1.5 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation through policies or procedures of the method(s) to restrict
physical access; method(s) of the full-disk encryption solution along with the
authentication protocol; method(s) of the multi-factor authentication solution; or
documentation of other method(s) to mitigate the risk of unauthorized use.
Section 2.1: Examples of evidence for Section 2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or procedures
that document a review of installed security patch(es); memoranda, electronic
Page 27 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
mail, policies or contracts from parties other than the Responsible Entity that
identify the security patching process or vulnerability mitigation performed by the
party other than the Responsible Entity; evidence from change management
systems, electronic mail, system documentation or contracts that identifies
acceptance by the Responsible Entity that the practices of the party other than
the Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other method(s) to
mitigate software vulnerabilities for Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a party
other than the Responsible Entity. If a Transient Cyber Asset does not have the
capability to use method(s) that mitigate the risk from unpatched software,
evidence may include documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party other
than the Responsible Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset does not
have the capability.
Section 2.2: Examples of evidence for Section 2.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or procedures
that document a review of the installed antivirus update level; memoranda,
electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from the party other
than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update process, the use of
application whitelisting, use of live of operating systems or system hardening
performed by the party other than the Responsible Entity; evidence from change
management systems, electronic mail or contracts that identifies the Responsible
Entity’s acceptance that the practices of the party other than the Responsible
Entity are acceptable; or documentation of other method(s) to mitigate malicious
code for Transient Cyber Asset(s) managed by a party other than the Responsible
Entity. If a Transient Cyber Asset does not have the capability to use method(s)
that mitigate the introduction of malicious code, evidence may include
documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party other than the Responsible
Entity that identifies that the Transient Cyber Asset does not have the capability.
Section 2.3: Examples of evidence for Section 2.3 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or contracts
that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigations are
necessary and that they have been implemented prior to connecting the
Transient Cyber Asset managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity.
Section 3.1: Examples of evidence for Section 3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from asset management systems, human resource management
systems, forms or spreadsheets that shows authorization of Removable Media.
The documentation must identify Removable Media, individually or by group of
Removable Media, along with the authorized users, either individually or by
group or role, and the authorized locations, either individually or by group.
Section 3.2: Examples of evidence for Section 3.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to mitigate malicious code such
as results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on-
demand scanning. Documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating
Page 28 of 29
CIP-010-4 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
the threat of detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the
method(s) used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and
that show mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or
documented confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed
to be free of malicious code.
Page 29 of 29
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-010-4.pdf ---

