--- START DOCUMENT: cip-012-1.pdf ---
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
2. Number: CIP-012-1
3. Purpose: To protect the confidentiality and integrity of Real-time Assessment and
Real-time monitoring data transmitted between Control Centers.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: The requirements in this standard apply to the following
functional entities, referred to as “Responsible Entities,” that own or operate a
Control Center.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Generator Operator
4.1.3. Generator Owner
4.1.4. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.5. Transmission Operator
4.1.6. Transmission Owner
4.2. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Reliability Standard CIP-012-1:
4.2.1. Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.2. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant
to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3. A Control Center that transmits to another Control Center Real-time
Assessment or Real-time monitoring data pertaining only to the
generation resource or Transmission station or substation co-located
with the transmitting Control Center.
5. Effective Date: See Implementation Plan for CIP-012-1.
Page 1 of 5
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. The Responsible Entity shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances,
one or more documented plan(s) to mitigate the risks posed by unauthorized
disclosure and unauthorized modification of Real-time Assessment and Real-time
monitoring data while being transmitted between any applicable Control Centers. The
Responsible Entity is not required to include oral communications in its plan. The plan
shall include: [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning]
1.1. Identification of security protection used to mitigate the risks posed by
unauthorized disclosure and unauthorized modification of Real-time Assessment
and Real-time monitoring data while being transmitted between Control
Centers;
1.2. Identification of where the Responsible Entity applied security protection for
transmitting Real-time Assessment and Real-time monitoring data between
Control Centers; and
1.3. If the Control Centers are owned or operated by different Responsible Entities,
identification of the responsibilities of each Responsible Entity for applying
security protection to the transmission of Real-time Assessment and Real-time
monitoring data between those Control Centers.
M1. Evidence may include, but is not limited to, documented plan(s) that meet the
security objective of Requirement R1 and documentation demonstrating the
implementation of the plan(s).
Page 2 of 5
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC, the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise designated by an
Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective roles of monitoring
and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and enforceable Reliability
Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate
compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period specified below
is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide
other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-time period since the
last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• The Responsible Entities shall keep data or evidence of each Requirement in
this Reliability Standard for three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or
for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program” refers
to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the
associated Reliability Standard.
Page 3 of 5
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
N/A The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity failed
R1.
documented its plan(s) but documented its plan(s) but to document plan(s) for
failed to include one of the failed to include two of the Requirement R1;
applicable Parts of the plan applicable Parts of the plan
Or
as specified in Requirement as specified in Requirement
R1. R1.
The Responsible Entity failed
to implement any Part of its
plan(s) for Requirement R1,
except under CIP Exceptional
Circumstances.
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
Implementation Plan.
Technical Rationale for CIP-012-1.
Implementation Guidance.
Page 4 of 5
CIP-012-1 – Cyber Security – Communications between Control Centers
Version History
Version Date Action Change
Tracking
1 August 16, 2018 Adopted by NERC Board of Trustees Respond to FERC
Order No. 822
1 January 23, 2020 FERC Order issued approving CIP-012-1.
Docket No. RM18-20-000;
Page 5 of 5
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-012-1.pdf ---

