--- START DOCUMENT: cip-006-6.pdf ---
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
2. Number: CIP‐006‐6
3. Purpose: To manage physical access to Bulk Electric System (BES) Cyber Systems by
specifying a physical security plan in support of protecting BES Cyber
Systems against compromise that could lead to misoperation or
instability in the BES.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained
herein, the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional
entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the
functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities, systems,
and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage Load shedding
(UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Special Protection System (SPS) or Remedial Action Scheme (RAS)
where the SPS or RAS is subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or
Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
4.1.5 Interchange Coordinator or Interchange Authority
4.1.6 Reliability Coordinator
Page 1 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
4.1.7 Transmission Operator
4.1.8 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1 above
are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in this
standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a common control system
owned by the Responsible Entity, without human operator initiation,
of 300 MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each SPS or RAS where the SPS or RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies to
Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial switching
requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and including the first
interconnection point of the starting station service of the next generation
unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP‐006‐6:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Assets at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety
Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Assets associated with communication networks and data
communication links between discrete Electronic Security Perimeters.
4.2.3.3 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan pursuant to 10
C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.4 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are not included
in section 4.2.1 above.
Page 2 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
4.2.3.5 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber Systems
categorized as high impact or medium impact according to the CIP‐002‐5.1
identification and categorization processes.
5. Effective Dates:
See Implementation Plan for CIP‐006‐6.
6. Background:
Standard CIP‐006 exists as part of a suite of CIP Standards related to cyber security,
which require the initial identification and categorization of BES Cyber Systems and
require a minimum level of organizational, operational and procedural controls to
mitigate risk to BES Cyber Systems.
Most requirements open with, “Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more
documented [processes, plan, etc.] that include the applicable items in [Table
Reference].” The referenced table requires the applicable items in the procedures for
the requirement’s common subject matter.
The term documented processes refers to a set of required instructions specific to the
Responsible Entity and to achieve a specific outcome. This term does not imply any
particular naming or approval structure beyond what is stated in the requirements.
An entity should include as much as it believes necessary in its documented
processes, but it must address the applicable requirements in the table.
The terms program and plan are sometimes used in place of documented processes
where it makes sense and is commonly understood. For example, documented
processes describing a response are typically referred to as plans (i.e., incident
response plans and recovery plans). Likewise, a security plan can describe an
approach involving multiple procedures to address a broad subject matter.
Similarly, the term program may refer to the organization’s overall implementation of
its policies, plans and procedures involving a subject matter. Examples in the
standards include the personnel risk assessment program and the personnel training
program. The full implementation of the CIP Cyber Security Standards could also be
referred to as a program. However, the terms program and plan do not imply any
additional requirements beyond what is stated in the standards.
Responsible Entities can implement common controls that meet requirements for
multiple high and medium impact BES Cyber Systems. For example, a single training
program could meet the requirements for training personnel across multiple BES
Cyber Systems.
Measures for the initial requirement are simply the documented processes
themselves. Measures in the table rows provide examples of evidence to show
documentation and implementation of applicable items in the documented
processes. These measures serve to provide guidance to entities in acceptable records
of compliance and should not be viewed as an all‐inclusive list.
Page 3 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Throughout the standards, unless otherwise stated, bulleted items in the
requirements and measures are items that are linked with an “or,” and numbered
items are items that are linked with an “and.”
Many references in the Applicability section use a threshold of 300 MW for UFLS and
UVLS. This particular threshold of 300 MW for UVLS and UFLS was provided in Version
1 of the CIP Cyber Security Standards. The threshold remains at 300 MW since it is
specifically addressing UVLS and UFLS, which are last ditch efforts to save the Bulk
Electric System. A review of UFLS tolerances defined within regional reliability
standards for UFLS program requirements to date indicates that the historical value of
300 MW represents an adequate and reasonable threshold value for allowable UFLS
operational tolerances.
“Applicable Systems” Columns in Tables:
Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to further define the scope of systems
to which a specific requirement row applies. The CSO706 SDT adapted this concept
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (“NIST”) Risk Management
Framework as a way of applying requirements more appropriately based on impact
and connectivity characteristics. The following conventions are used in the
“Applicable Systems” column as described.
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
high impact according to the CIP‐002‐5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems – Applies to BES Cyber Systems categorized as
medium impact according to the CIP‐002‐5.1 identification and categorization
processes.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems without External Routable Connectivity –
Only applies to medium impact BES Cyber Systems without External Routable
Connectivity.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity – Only
applies to medium impact BES Cyber Systems with External Routable Connectivity.
This also excludes Cyber Assets in the BES Cyber System that cannot be directly
accessed through External Routable Connectivity.
 Electronic Access Control or Monitoring Systems (EACMS) – Applies to each
Electronic Access Control or Monitoring System associated with a referenced high
impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber System. Examples may
include, but are not limited to, firewalls, authentication servers, and log
monitoring and alerting systems.
 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) – Applies to each Physical Access Control
System associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium
impact BES Cyber System.
Page 4 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
 Protected Cyber Assets (PCA) – Applies to each Protected Cyber Asset associated
with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium impact BES Cyber
System.
 Locally mounted hardware or devices at the Physical Security Perimeter –
Applies to the locally mounted hardware or devices (e.g. such as motion sensors,
electronic lock control mechanisms, and badge readers) at a Physical Security
Perimeter associated with a referenced high impact BES Cyber System or medium
impact BES Cyber System with External Routable Connectivity, and that does not
contain or store access control information or independently perform access
authentication. These hardware and devices are excluded in the definition of
Physical Access Control Systems.
Page 5 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented physical security plan(s) that collectively include all of
the applicable requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long Term Planning and Same Day Operations].
M1. Evidence must include each of the documented physical security plans that collectively include all of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation
of the plan or plans as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems Define operational or procedural controls An example of evidence may include, but
without External Routable Connectivity to restrict physical access. is not limited to, documentation that
operational or procedural controls exist.
Physical Access Control Systems (PACS)
associated with:
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems, or
 Medium Impact BES Cyber
Systems with External Routable
Connectivity
1.2 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with Utilize at least one physical access control An example of evidence may include, but
External Routable Connectivity and their to allow unescorted physical access into is not limited to, language in the physical
associated: each applicable Physical Security security plan that describes each Physical
1. EACMS; and Perimeter to only those individuals who Security Perimeter and how unescorted
have authorized unescorted physical physical access is controlled by one or
2. PCA
access. more different methods and proof that
unescorted physical access is restricted to
only authorized individuals, such as a list
of authorized individuals accompanied by
access logs.
Page 6 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Where technically feasible, utilize two or An example of evidence may include, but
associated: more different physical access controls is not limited to, language in the physical
1. EACMS; and
(this does not require two completely security plan that describes the Physical
independent physical access control Security Perimeters and how unescorted
2. PCA
systems) to collectively allow unescorted physical access is controlled by two or
physical access into Physical Security more different methods and proof that
Perimeters to only those individuals who unescorted physical access is restricted to
have authorized unescorted physical only authorized individuals, such as a list
access. of authorized individuals accompanied by
access logs.
1.4 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Monitor for unauthorized access through An example of evidence may include, but
associated: a physical access point into a Physical is not limited to, documentation of
1. EACMS; and
Security Perimeter. controls that monitor for unauthorized
access through a physical access point into
2. PCA
a Physical Security Perimeter.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
Page 7 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.5 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Issue an alarm or alert in response to An example of evidence may include, but
associated: detected unauthorized access through a is not limited to, language in the physical
1. EACMS; and
physical access point into a Physical security plan that describes the issuance
Security Perimeter to the personnel of an alarm or alert in response to
2. PCA
identified in the BES Cyber Security unauthorized access through a physical
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
Incident response plan within 15 minutes access control into a Physical Security
External Routable Connectivity and their
of detection. Perimeter and additional evidence that
associated:
the alarm or alert was issued and
1. EACMS; and communicated as identified in the BES
Cyber Security Incident Response Plan,
2. PCA
such as manual or electronic alarm or
alert logs, cell phone or pager logs, or
other evidence that documents that the
alarm or alert was generated and
communicated.
1.6 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) Monitor each Physical Access Control An example of evidence may include, but
associated with: System for unauthorized physical access is not limited to, documentation of
to a Physical Access Control System. controls that monitor for unauthorized
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems,
or
physical access to a PACS.
 Medium Impact BES Cyber
Systems with External Routable
Connectivity
Page 8 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.7 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) Issue an alarm or alert in response to An example of evidence may include, but
associated with: detected unauthorized physical access to is not limited to, language in the physical
a Physical Access Control System to the security plan that describes the issuance
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems,
personnel identified in the BES Cyber of an alarm or alert in response to
or
Security Incident response plan within 15 unauthorized physical access to Physical
 Medium Impact BES Cyber
minutes of the detection. Access Control Systems and additional
Systems with External Routable
evidence that the alarm or alerts was
Connectivity
issued and communicated as identified in
the BES Cyber Security Incident Response
Plan, such as alarm or alert logs, cell
phone or pager logs, or other evidence
that the alarm or alert was generated and
communicated.
1.8 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Log (through automated means or by An example of evidence may include, but
associated: personnel who control entry) entry of is not limited to, language in the physical
1. EACMS; and
each individual with authorized security plan that describes logging and
unescorted physical access into each recording of physical entry into each
2. PCA
Physical Security Perimeter, with Physical Security Perimeter and additional
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
information to identify the individual and evidence to demonstrate that this logging
External Routable Connectivity and their
date and time of entry. has been implemented, such as logs of
associated:
physical access into Physical Security
1. EACMS; and Perimeters that show the individual and
the date and time of entry into Physical
2. PCA
Security Perimeter.
1.9 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Retain physical access logs of entry of An example of evidence may include, but
associated: individuals with authorized unescorted is not limited to, dated documentation
1. EACMS; and physical access into each Physical Security such as logs of physical access into
Perimeter for at least ninety calendar Physical Security Perimeters that show the
2. PCA
days. date and time of entry into Physical
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
Security Perimeter.
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
Page 9 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R1 – Physical Security Plan
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.10 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and Restrict physical access to cabling and other An example of evidence may include, but
their associated: nonprogrammable communication is not limited to, records of the
components used for connection between Responsible Entity’s implementation of
 PCA
applicable Cyber Assets within the same the physical access restrictions (e.g.,
Electronic Security Perimeter in those cabling and components secured through
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems at
instances when such cabling and components conduit or secured cable trays)
Control Centers and their associated:
are located outside of a Physical Security encryption, monitoring, or equally
 PCA
Perimeter. effective logical protections.
Where physical access restrictions to such
cabling and components are not
implemented, the Responsible Entity shall
document and implement one or more of the
following:
 encryption of data that transits such
cabling and components; or
 monitoring the status of the
communication link composed of
such cabling and components and
issuing an alarm or alert in response
to detected communication failures
to the personnel identified in the BES
Cyber Security Incident response plan
within 15 minutes of detection; or
 an equally effective logical
protection.
Page 10 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented visitor control program(s) that include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon:
Same Day Operations.]
M2. Evidence must include one or more documented visitor control programs that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as
described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP‐006‐6 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Require continuous escorted access of An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: visitors (individuals who are provided not limited to, language in a visitor control
1. EACMS; and access but are not authorized for program that requires continuous escorted
2. PCA
unescorted physical access) within each access of visitors within Physical Security
Physical Security Perimeter, except during Perimeters and additional evidence to
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
CIP Exceptional Circumstances. demonstrate that the process was
External Routable Connectivity and their
implemented, such as visitor logs.
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
2.2 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Require manual or automated logging of An example of evidence may include, but is
associated: visitor entry into and exit from the Physical not limited to, language in a visitor control
1. EACMS; and Security Perimeter that includes date and program that requires continuous escorted
2. PCA
time of the initial entry and last exit, the access of visitors within Physical Security
visitor’s name, and the name of an Perimeters and additional evidence to
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
individual point of contact responsible for demonstrate that the process was
External Routable Connectivity and their
the visitor, except during CIP Exceptional implemented, such as dated visitor logs
associated:
Circumstances. that include the required information.
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
Page 11 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
CIP‐006‐6 Table R2 – Visitor Control Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High Impact BES Cyber Systems and their Retain visitor logs for at least ninety An example of evidence may include, but
associated: calendar days. is not limited to, documentation showing
1. EACMS; and logs have been retained for at least ninety
2. PCA
calendar days.
Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems with
External Routable Connectivity and their
associated:
1. EACMS; and
2. PCA
Page 12 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented Physical Access Control System maintenance and testing
program(s) that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R3 – Maintenance and Testing
Program. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M3. Evidence must include each of the documented Physical Access Control System maintenance and testing programs that
collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP‐006‐6 Table R3 – Maintenance and Testing Program and
additional evidence to demonstrate implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP‐006‐6 Table R3 – Physical Access Control System Maintenance and Testing Program
Part Applicable Systems Requirement Measures
3.1 Physical Access Control Systems (PACS) Maintenance and testing of each Physical An example of evidence may include, but
associated with: Access Control System and locally mounted is not limited to, a maintenance and testing
hardware or devices at the Physical program that provides for testing each
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems, or
Security Perimeter at least once every 24 Physical Access Control System and locally
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems calendar months to ensure they function mounted hardware or devices associated
with External Routable Connectivity properly. with each applicable Physical Security
Perimeter at least once every 24 calendar
Locally mounted hardware or devices at
months and additional evidence to
the Physical Security Perimeter associated
demonstrate that this testing was done,
with:
such as dated maintenance records, or
 High Impact BES Cyber Systems, or other documentation showing testing and
maintenance has been performed on each
 Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems
applicable device or system at least once
with External Routable Connectivity
every 24 calendar months.
Page 13 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Enforcement Authority” (CEA)
means NERC or the Regional Entity in their respective roles of monitoring and enforcing
compliance with the NERC Reliability Standards.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is
required to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where
the evidence retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last
audit, the CEA may ask an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was
compliant for the full time period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time
as part of an investigation:
 Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard
for three calendar years.
 If a Responsible Entity is found non‐compliant, it shall keep information related to
the non‐compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time
specified above, whichever is longer.
 The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted
subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
Compliance Audits
Self‐Certifications
Spot Checking
Compliance Investigations
Self‐Reporting
Complaints
1.4. Additional Compliance Information:
None
Page 14 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
2. Table of Compliance Elements
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 Long Term Medium N/A N/A N/A The Responsible Entity did
Planning not document or
implement physical
Same‐Day
security plans. (R1)
Operations
OR
The Responsible Entity did
not document or
implement operational or
procedural controls to
restrict physical access.
(1.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
documented and
implemented physical
access controls, but at
least one control does not
exist to restrict access to
Applicable Systems. (1.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
documented and
implemented physical
access controls, but at
least two different
controls do not exist to
Page 15 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
restrict access to
Applicable Systems. (1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
monitor for unauthorized
access through a physical
access point into a
Physical Security
Perimeter. (1.4)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
alert for detected
unauthorized access
through a physical access
point into a Physical
Security Perimeter or to
communicate such alerts
within 15 minutes to
identified personnel. (1.5)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
monitor each Physical
Access Control System for
unauthorized physical
access to a Physical Access
Page 16 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Control Systems. (1.6)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
alert for unauthorized
physical access to Physical
Access Control Systems or
to communicate such
alerts within 15 minutes to
identified personnel. (1.7)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
log authorized physical
entry into each Physical
Security Perimeter with
sufficient information to
identify the individual and
date and time of entry.
(1.8)
OR
The Responsible Entity
does not have a process to
retain physical access logs
for 90 calendar days. (1.9)
OR
The Responsible Entity did
not document or
Page 17 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
implement physical access
restrictions, encryption,
monitoring or equally
effective logical
protections for cabling
and other
nonprogrammable
communication
components used for
connection between
applicable Cyber Assets
within the same Electronic
Security Perimeter in
those instances when such
cabling and components
are located outside of a
Physical Security
Perimeter. (1.10)
R2 Same‐Day Medium N/A N/A N/A The Responsible Entity has
Operations failed to include or
implement a visitor
control program that
requires continuous
escorted access of visitors
within any Physical
Security Perimeter. (2.1)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
failed to include or
Page 18 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
implement a visitor
control program that
requires logging of the
initial entry and last exit
dates and times of the
visitor, the visitor’s name,
and the point of contact.
(2.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity
failed to include or
implement a visitor
control program to retain
visitor logs for at least
ninety days. (2.3)
R3 Long Term Medium The The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity
Planning Responsible has documented and has documented and did not document or
Entity has implemented a implemented a implement a
documented maintenance and maintenance and maintenance and
and testing program for testing program for testing program for
implemented a Physical Access Control Physical Access Control Physical Access Control
maintenance Systems and locally Systems and locally Systems and locally
and testing mounted hardware or mounted hardware or mounted hardware or
program for devices at the Physical devices at the Physical devices at the Physical
Physical Access Security Perimeter, but Security Perimeter, but Security Perimeter. (3.1)
Control did not complete did not complete
OR
Systems and required testing within required testing within
The Responsible Entity
locally 25 calendar months but 26 calendar months but
Page 19 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Violation Severity Levels (CIP‐006‐6)
R # Time Horizon VRF
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
mounted did complete required did complete required has documented and
hardware or testing within 26 testing within 27 implemented a
devices at the calendar months. (3.1) calendar months. (3.1) maintenance and
Physical testing program for
Security Physical Access Control
Perimeter, but Systems and locally
did not mounted hardware or
complete devices at the Physical
required Security Perimeter, but
testing within did not complete
24 calendar required testing within
months but did 27 calendar months.
complete (3.1)
required
testing within
25 calendar
months. (3.1)
Page 20 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
None.
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to
“control center.”
2 9/30/09 Modifications to clarify the requirements
and to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
responsible entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to
Compliance Enforcement Authority.
3 12/16/09 Updated Version Number from ‐2 to ‐3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or
system from service in order to perform
testing, in response to FERC order issued
September 30, 2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees.
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to
coordinate with
other CIP standards
and to revise
Page 21 of 27
CIP‐006‐6 — Cyber Security — Physical Security of BES Cyber Systems
Version Date Action Change Tracking
format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP‐006‐5.
6 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed FERC
directives from
Order No. 791.
6 1/21/16 FERC order issued approving CIP‐006‐6.
Docket No. RM15‐14‐000
Page 22 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Guidelines and Technical Basis
Section 4 – Scope of Applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Standards
Section “4. Applicability” of the standards provides important information for Responsible
Entities to determine the scope of the applicability of the CIP Cyber Security Requirements.
Section “4.1. Functional Entities” is a list of NERC functional entities to which the standard
applies. If the entity is registered as one or more of the functional entities listed in Section 4.1,
then the NERC CIP Cyber Security Standards apply. Note that there is a qualification in Section
4.1 that restricts the applicability in the case of Distribution Providers to only those that own
certain types of systems and equipment listed in 4.2.
Section “4.2. Facilities” defines the scope of the Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by
the Responsible Entity, as qualified in Section 4.1, that is subject to the requirements of the
standard. As specified in the exemption section 4.2.3.5, this standard does not apply to
Responsible Entities that do not have High Impact or Medium Impact BES Cyber Systems under
CIP‐002‐5.1’s categorization. In addition to the set of BES Facilities, Control Centers, and other
systems and equipment, the list includes the set of systems and equipment owned by
Distribution Providers. While the NERC Glossary term “Facilities” already includes the BES
characteristic, the additional use of the term BES here is meant to reinforce the scope of
applicability of these Facilities where it is used, especially in this applicability scoping section.
This in effect sets the scope of Facilities, systems, and equipment that is subject to the
standards.
General:
While the focus of this Reliability Standard has shifted away from the definition and
management of a completely enclosed “six‐wall” boundary, it is expected that in many
instances a six‐wall boundary will remain a primary mechanism for controlling, alerting, and
logging access to BES Cyber Systems. Taken together, these controls outlined below will
effectively constitute the physical security plan to manage physical access to BES Cyber
Systems.
Requirement R1:
Methods of physical access control include:
 Card Key: A means of electronic access where the access rights of the card holder are
predefined in a computer database. Access rights may differ from one perimeter to
another.
 Special Locks: These include, but are not limited to, locks with “restricted key” systems,
magnetic locks that can be operated remotely, and “man‐trap” systems.
 Security Personnel: Personnel responsible for controlling physical access who may reside
on‐site or at a monitoring station.
Page 23 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
 Other Authentication Devices: Biometric, keypad, token, or other equivalent devices that
control physical access into the Physical Security Perimeter.
Methods to monitor physical access include:
 Alarm Systems: Systems that alarm to indicate interior motion or when a door, gate, or
window has been opened without authorization. These alarms must provide for
notification within 15 minutes to individuals responsible for response.
 Human Observation of Access Points: Monitoring of physical access points by security
personnel who are also controlling physical access.
Methods to log physical access include:
 Computerized Logging: Electronic logs produced by the Responsible Entity’s selected access
control and alerting method.
 Video Recording: Electronic capture of video images of sufficient quality to determine
identity.
 Manual Logging: A log book or sign‐in sheet, or other record of physical access maintained
by security or other personnel authorized to control and monitor physical access.
The FERC Order No. 706, Paragraph 572, directive discussed utilizing two or more different and
complementary physical access controls to provide defense in depth. It does not require two or
more Physical Security Perimeters, nor does it exclude the use of layered perimeters. Use of
two‐factor authentication would be acceptable at the same entry points for a non‐layered
single perimeter. For example, controls for a sole perimeter could include either a combination
of card key and pin code (something you know and something you have), or a card key and
biometric scanner (something you have and something you are), or a physical key in
combination with a guard‐monitored remote camera and door release, where the “guard” has
adequate information to authenticate the person the guard is observing or talking to prior to
permitting access (something you have and something you are). The two‐factor authentication
could be implemented using a single Physical Access Control System but more than one
authentication method must be utilized. For physically layered protection, a locked gate in
combination with a locked control‐building could be acceptable, provided no single
authenticator (e.g., key or card key) would provide access through both.
Entities may choose for certain PACS to reside in a PSP controlling access to applicable BES
Cyber Systems. For these PACS, there is no additional obligation to comply with Requirement
Parts 1.1, 1.6 and 1.7 beyond what is already required for the PSP.
The new requirement part CIP‐006‐6, Requirement R1, Part 1.10 responds to the directive
found in FERC Order No. 791, Paragraph 150. The requirement intends to protect cabling and
nonprogrammable communication components that are within an ESP, but extend outside of a
PSP. This protection, similar to the FERC Approved NERC Petition on the interpretation on CIP‐
006‐2 from PacifiCorp, must be accomplished either by physically protecting the cabling and
components that leave a PSP (such as by conduit or secured cable trays) or through data
encryption, circuit monitoring, or equally effective logical protections. It is intended that the
Page 24 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
physical protections reduce the possibility of tampering or allowing direct access to the
nonprogrammable devices. Conduit, secured cable trays, and secured communication closets
are examples of these types of protections. These physical security measures should be
implemented in such a way that they would provide some mechanism to detect or recognize
that someone could have tampered with the cabling and non‐programmable components. This
could be something as simple as a padlock on a communications closet where the entity would
recognize if the padlock had been cut off. Alternatively, this protection may also be
accomplished through the use of armored cabling or via the stainless steel or aluminum tube
protecting the fiber inside an optical ground wire (OPGW) cable. In using any of these methods,
care should be taken to protect the entire length of the cabling including any termination points
that may be outside of a defined PSP.
This requirement part only covers those portions of cabling and nonprogrammable
communications components that are located outside of the PSP, but inside the ESP. Where
this cabling and non‐programmable communications components exist inside the PSP, this
requirement part no longer applies.
The requirement focuses on physical protection of the communications cabling and
components as this is a requirement in a physical security standard and the gap in protection
identified by FERC in Order 791 is one of physical protections. However, the requirement part
recognizes that there is more than one way to provide protection to communication cabling
and nonprogrammable components. In particular, the requirement provides a mechanism for
entities to select an alternative to physical security protection that may be chosen in a situation
where an entity cannot implement physical security or simply chooses not to implement
physical security. The entity is under no obligation to justify or explain why it chose logical
protections over physical protections identified in the requirement.
The alternative protective measures identified in the CIP‐006‐6 R1, Part 1.10 (encryption and
circuit monitoring) were identified as acceptable alternatives in NERC petition of the PacifiCorp
Interpretation of CIP‐006‐2 which was approved by FERC (RD10‐13‐000). If an entity chooses to
implement an “an equally effective logical protection” in lieu of one of the protection
mechanisms identified in the standard, the entity would be expected to document how the
protection is equally effective. NERC explained in its petition of the PacifiCorp Interpretation of
CIP‐006‐2 that the measures are relevant to access or physical tampering. Therefore, the entity
may choose to discuss how its protection may provide detection of tampering. The entity may
also choose to explain how its protection is equivalent to the other logical options identified in
the standard in terms of the CIA triad (confidentiality, integrity, and availability). The entity
may find value in reviewing their plans prior to implementation with the regional entity, but
there is no obligation to do so.
The intent of the requirement is not to require physical protection of third party components,
consistent with FERC Order 791‐A. The requirement allows flexibility in that the entity has
control of how to design its ESP and also has the ability to extend its ESP outside its PSP via the
logical mechanisms specified in CIP‐006‐6 Requirement 1, Part 1.10 such as encryption (which is
an option specifically identified in FERC Order 791‐A). These mechanisms should provide
sufficient protections to an entity’s BES Cyber Systems while not requiring controls to be
Page 25 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
implemented on third‐party components when entities rely on leased third‐party
communications.
In addition to the cabling, the components in scope of this requirement part are those
components outside of a PSP that could otherwise be considered a BES Cyber Asset or
Protected Cyber Asset except that they do not meet the definition of Cyber Asset because they
are nonprogrammable. Examples of these nonprogrammable components include, but are not
limited to, unmanaged switches, hubs, patch panels, media converters, port savers, and
couplers.
Requirement R2:
The logging of visitors should capture each visit of the individual and does not need to capture
each entry or exit during that visit. This is meant to allow a visitor to temporarily exit the
Physical Security Perimeter to obtain something they left in their vehicle or outside the area
without requiring a new log entry for each and every entry during the visit.
The SDT also determined that a point of contact should be documented who can provide
additional details about the visit if questions arise in the future. The point of contact could be
the escort, but there is no need to document everyone that acted as an escort for the visitor.
Requirement R3:
This includes the testing of locally mounted hardware or devices used in controlling, alerting or
logging access to the Physical Security Perimeter. This includes motion sensors, electronic lock
control mechanisms, and badge readers which are not deemed to be part of the Physical Access
Control System but are required for the protection of the BES Cyber Systems.
Rationale:
During development of this standard, text boxes were embedded within the standard to explain
the rationale for various parts of the standard. Upon BOT approval, the text from the rationale
text boxes was moved to this section.
Rationale for Requirement R1:
Each Responsible Entity shall ensure that physical access to all BES Cyber Systems is restricted
and appropriately managed. Entities may choose for certain Physical Access Control Systems
(PACS) to reside in a Physical Security Perimeter (PSP) controlling access to applicable BES Cyber
Systems. For these PACS, there is no additional obligation to comply with Requirement R1,
Parts 1.1, 1.6 and 1.7 beyond what is already required for the PSP.
Regarding Requirement R1, Part 1.10, when cabling and other nonprogrammable components
of a Control Center’s communication network cannot be secured in a PSP, steps must be taken
to ensure the integrity of the BES Cyber Systems. Exposed communication pathways outside of
a PSP necessitate that physical or logical protections be installed to reduce the likelihood that
man‐in‐the‐middle attacks could compromise the integrity of their connected BES Cyber Assets
or PCAs that are required to reside within PSPs. While it is anticipated that priority
consideration will be given to physically securing the cabling and nonprogrammable
Page 26 of 27
Guidelines and Technical Basis
communications components, the SDT understands that configurations arise when physical
access restrictions are not ideal and Responsible Entities are able to reasonably defend their
physically exposed communications components through specific additional logical protections.
Rationale for Requirement R2:
To control when personnel without authorized unescorted physical access can be in any
Physical Security Perimeters protecting BES Cyber Systems or Electronic Access Control or
Monitoring Systems, as applicable in Table R2.
Rationale for Requirement R3:
To ensure all Physical Access Control Systems and devices continue to function properly.
Page 27 of 27
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-006-6.pdf ---

