--- START DOCUMENT: cip-008-7.pdf ---
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
2. Number: CIP-008-7
3. Purpose: To mitigate the risk to the reliable operation of the BES as the result of a
Cyber Security Incident by specifying incident response requirements.
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein,
the following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as
“Responsible Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific
functional entity or subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or
entities, the functional entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1 Balancing Authority
4.1.2 Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the Bulk
Electric System (BES):
4.1.2.1 Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.1.2.2 Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.1.2.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.1.3 Generator Operator
4.1.4 Generator Owner
Page 1 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
4.1.5 Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6 Transmission Operator
4.1.7 Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements
in this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or
subset of Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified
explicitly.
4.2.1 Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection
or restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1 Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1 is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2 performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2 Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more
requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3 Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that
applies to Transmission where the Protection System is
subject to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.4 Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2 Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers:
All BES Facilities.
4.2.3 Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-008-7:
4.2.3.1 Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2 Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
Page 2 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
4.2.3.3 Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between the Cyber Systems
providing confidentiality and integrity of an ESP.
4.2.3.4 The systems, structures, and components that are regulated
by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security
plan pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5 For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that
are not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6 Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems (BES) categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to
define the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Dates: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan”.
Page 3 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall document one or more Cyber Security Incident response plan(s) that collectively include each
of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications. [Violation
Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Long Term Planning].
M1. Evidence must include each of the documented plan(s) that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in
CIP-008-7 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications.
CIP-008-7 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.1 High impact BCS and their associated One or more processes to identify, Examples of evidence may include, but are
Electronic Access Control and Monitoring classify, and respond to Cyber Security not limited to, dated documentation of
Systems (EACMS) Incidents. Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
that include the process(es) to identify,
Medium impact BCS and their associated
classify, and respond to Cyber Security
EACMS
Incidents.
Shared Cyber Infrastructure (SCI)
supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
1.2 High impact BCS and their associated One or more processes: Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS not limited to, dated documentation of
1.2.1 That include criteria to evaluate and
Cyber Security Incident response plan(s)
Medium impact BCS and their associated define attempts to compromise;
that provide guidance or thresholds for
EACMS
1.2.2 To determine if an identified Cyber
determining which Cyber Security
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this Security Incident is:
Incidents are also Reportable Cyber
Part
• A Reportable Cyber Security
Security Incidents or a Cyber Security
Incident; or
Incident that is determined to be an
• An attempt to compromise, as attempt to compromise a system
determined by applying the identified in the Applicable Systems
criteria from Part 1.2.1, one or column including justification for attempt
more systems identified in the determination criteria and documented
Applicable Systems column for processes for notification.
this Part; and
1.2.3 To provide notification per
Requirement R4.
Page 4 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-7 Table R1 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Specifications
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.3 High impact BCS and their associated The roles and responsibilities of Cyber Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS Security Incident response groups or not limited to, dated Cyber Security
individuals. Incident response process(es) or
Medium impact BCS and their associated
procedure(s) that define roles and
EACMS
responsibilities (e.g., monitoring,
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
reporting, initiating, documenting, etc.) of
Part
Cyber Security Incident response groups
or individuals.
1.4 High impact BCS and their associated Incident handling procedures for Cyber Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS Security Incidents. not limited to, dated Cyber Security
Incident response process(es) or
Medium impact BCS and their associated
procedure(s) that address incident
EACMS
handling (e.g., containment, eradication,
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
recovery/incident resolution).
Part
Page 5 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement each of its documented Cyber Security Incident response plans to collectively
include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Implementation and Testing. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning and Real-Time Operations].
M2. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates implementation of each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing.
CIP-008-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1 High impact BCS and their associated Test each Cyber Security Incident response Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS plan(s) at least once every 15 calendar not limited to, dated evidence of a lessons-
months: learned report that includes a summary of
Medium impact BCS and their associated
the test or a compilation of notes, logs, and
EACMS • By responding to an actual
communication resulting from the test.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this Reportable Cyber Security Incident;
Types of exercises may include discussion
Part • With a paper drill or tabletop exercise
or operations based exercises.
of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident; or
• With an operational exercise of a
Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
2.2 High impact BCS and their associated Use the Cyber Security Incident response Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS plan(s) under Requirement R1 when not limited to, incident reports, logs, and
responding to a Reportable Cyber Security notes that were kept during the incident
Medium impact BCS and their associated
Incident, responding to a Cyber Security response process, and follow-up
EACMS
Incident that attempted to compromise a documentation that describes deviations
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
system identified in the Applicable Systems taken from the plan during the incident
Part
column for this Part, or performing an response or exercise.
exercise of a Reportable Cyber Security
Incident. Document deviations from the
plan(s) taken during the response to the
incident or exercise.
Page 6 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-7 Table R2 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Implementation and Testing
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.3 High impact BCS and their associated Retain records related to Reportable Cyber Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS Security Incidents and Cyber Security not limited to, dated documentation, such
Incidents that attempted to compromise a as security logs, police reports, emails,
Medium impact BCS and their associated
system identified in the Applicable Systems response forms or checklists, forensic
EACMS
column for this Part as per the Cyber analysis results, restoration records, and
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Security Incident response plan(s) under post-incident review notes related to
Part
Requirement R1. Reportable Cyber Security Incidents and a
Cyber Security Incident that is determined
to be an attempt to compromise a system
identified in the Applicable Systems
column.
Page 7 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall maintain each of its Cyber Security Incident response plans according to each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan Review, Update, and
Communication. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Assessment].
M3. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates maintenance of each Cyber
Security Incident response plan according to the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R3 – Cyber Security
Incident Response Plan Review, Update, and Communication.
CIP-008-7 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Review, Update, and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High impact BCS and their associated No later than 90 calendar days after Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS completion of a Cyber Security Incident not limited to, all of the following:
response plan(s) test or actual Reportable
Medium impact BCS and their associated 1. Dated documentation of post
Cyber Security Incident response:
EACMS incident(s) review meeting notes or
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
3.1.1. Document any lessons learned or follow-up report showing lessons
document the absence of any learned associated with the Cyber
Part
lessons learned; Security Incident response plan(s) test
3.1.2. Update the Cyber Security or actual Reportable Cyber Security
Incident response or dated
Incident response plan based on
documentation stating there were no
any documented lessons learned
lessons learned;
associated with the plan; and
3.1.3. Notify each person or group with a
2. Dated and revised Cyber Security
defined role in the Cyber Security Incident response plan showing any
Incident response plan of the changes based on the lessons
updates to the Cyber Security learned; and
Incident response plan based on 3. Evidence of plan update distribution
any documented lessons learned. including, but not limited to:
• Emails;
• USPS or other mail service;
• Electronic distribution system; or
• Training sign-in sheets.
3.2 High impact BCS and their associated No later than 60 calendar days after a Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS change to the roles or responsibilities, not limited to:
Cyber Security Incident response groups or
1. Dated and revised Cyber Security
individuals, or technology that the
Incident response plan with changes
Page 8 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-7 Table R3 – Cyber Security Incident Response Plan
Review, Update, and Communication
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
Medium impact BCS and their associated Responsible Entity determines would to the roles or responsibilities,
EACMS impact the ability to execute the plan: responders or technology; and
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this 3.2.1. Update the Cyber Security 2. Evidence of plan update distribution
Part Incident response plan(s); and including, but not limited to:
3.2.2. Notify each person or group with a • Emails;
defined role in the Cyber Security
• USPS or other mail service;
Incident response plan of the
• Electronic distribution system; or
updates.
• Training sign-in sheets.
Page 9 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
R4. Each Responsible Entity shall notify the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC) and, if subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States, the United States Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), or their
successors, of a Reportable Cyber Security Incident and a Cyber Security Incident that was an attempt to compromise, as
determined by applying the criteria from Requirement R1, Part 1.2.1, a system identified in the Applicable Systems column,
unless prohibited by law, in accordance with each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R4 – Notifications
and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents. [Violation Risk Factor: Lower] [Time Horizon: Operations Assessment].
M4. Evidence must include, but is not limited to, documentation that collectively demonstrates notification of each determined
Reportable Cyber Security Incident and a Cyber Security Incident that was an attempt to compromise a system identified in
the Applicable Systems column according to the applicable requirement parts in CIP-008-7 Table R4 – Notifications and
Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents.
CIP-008-7 Table R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.1 High impact BCS and their associated Initial notifications and updates shall Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS include the following attributes, at a not limited to, dated documentation of
minimum, to the extent known: initial notifications and updates to the E-
Medium impact BCS and their associated
ISAC and CISA, or their successors.
EACMS 4.1.1 The functional impact;
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this 4.1.2 The attack vector used; and
Part
4.1.3 The level of intrusion that was
achieved or attempted.
4.2 High impact BCS and their associated After the Responsible Entity’s Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS determination made pursuant to not limited to, dated documentation of
documented process(es) in Requirement notices to the E-ISAC and CISA, or their
Medium impact BCS and their associated
R1, Part 1.2, provide initial notification successors.
EACMS
within the following timelines:
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
• One hour after the determination of
Part
a Reportable Cyber Security Incident.
• By the end of the next calendar day
after determination that a Cyber
Security Incident was an attempt to
compromise a system identified in
the Applicable Systems column for
this Part.
Page 10 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
CIP-008-7 Table R4 – Notifications and Reporting for Cyber Security Incidents
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
4.3 High impact BCS and their associated Provide updates, if any, within seven Examples of evidence may include, but are
EACMS calendar days of determination of new or not limited to, dated documentation of
changed attribute information required in submissions to the E-ISAC and CISA, or
Medium impact BCS and their associated
Part 4.1. their successors.
EACMS
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part
Page 11 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process:
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority:
The Regional Entity shall serve as the Compliance Enforcement Authority (“CEA”) unless
the applicable entity is owned, operated, or controlled by the Regional Entity. In such
cases the ERO or a Regional Entity approved by FERC or other applicable governmental
authority shall serve as the CEA.
1.2. Evidence Retention:
The following evidence retention periods identify the period of time an entity is required
to retain specific evidence to demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence
retention period specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may
ask an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full time
period since the last audit.
The Responsible Entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as identified
below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a longer period of time as
part of an investigation:
• Each Responsible Entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this standard for
three calendar years.
• If a Responsible Entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information related to the
non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved or for the time specified
above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and submitted subsequent
audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Assessment Processes:
As defined in the NERC Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement
Program” refers to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data or
information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with the associated
Reliability Standard.
Page 12 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
R1 N/A N/A The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
include the roles and develop a Cyber Security
responsibilities of Cyber Incident response plan with
Security Incident response one or more processes to
groups or individuals. (Part 1.3) identify, classify, and respond
to Cyber Security Incidents.
OR
(Part 1.1)
The Responsible Entity did not
OR
include incident handling
procedures for Cyber Security The Responsible Entity’s plan
Incidents. (Part 1.4) did not include one or more
processes to identify
OR
Reportable Cyber Security
The Responsible Entity’s plan
Incidents or a Cyber Security
did not include one or more
Incident that was an attempt to
processes to provide
compromise, as determined by
notification per Requirement
applying the criteria from Part
R4. (Part 1.2)
1.2.1, a system identified in the
OR
Applicable Systems column for
The Responsible Entity’s plan Part 1.2. (Part 1.2)
did not include one or more
processes that include criteria
to evaluate and define
attempts to compromise. (Part
1.2)
R2 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
test the Cyber Security Incident test the Cyber Security Incident test the Cyber Security Incident test the Cyber Security Incident
response plan(s) within 15 response plan(s) within 16 response plan(s) within 17 response plan(s) within 18
calendar months, not calendar months, not calendar months, not calendar months between tests
exceeding 16 calendar months exceeding 17 calendar months exceeding 18 calendar months of the plan(s). (Part 2.1)
between tests of the plan(s). between tests of the plan(s). between tests of the plan(s).
OR
(Par 2.1) (Part 2.1) (Part 2.1)
The Responsible Entity did not
OR
retain relevant records related
Page 13 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity did not to Reportable Cyber Security
document deviations, if any, Incidents or Cyber Security
from the plan during a test or Incidents that were an attempt
when a Reportable Cyber to compromise a system
Security Incident or a Cyber identified in the Applicable
Security Incident that was an Systems column for Part 2.3.
attempt to compromise a (Part 2.3)
system identified in the
Applicable Systems column for
Part 2.2 occurs. (Part 2.2)
R3 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity neither The Responsible Entity neither
notify each person or group update the Cyber Security documented lessons learned documented lessons learned
with a defined role in the Cyber Incident response plan based nor documented the absence nor documented the absence
Security Incident response plan on any documented lessons of any lessons learned within of any lessons learned within
of updates to the Cyber learned within 90 and less than 90 and less than 120 calendar 120 calendar days of a test or
Security Incident response plan 120 calendar days of a test or days of a test or actual incident actual incident response to a
within greater than 90 but less actual incident response to a response to a Reportable Cyber Reportable Cyber Security
than 120 calendar days of a Reportable Cyber Security Security Incident. (Part 3.1.1) Incident. (Part 3.1.1)
test or actual incident response Incident. (Part 3.1.2)
OR
to a Reportable Cyber Security
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
Incident. (Part 3.1.3)
The Responsible Entity did not update the Cyber Security
notify each person or group Incident response plan based
with a defined role in the Cyber on any documented lessons
Security Incident response plan learned within 120 calendar
of updates to the Cyber days of a test or actual incident
Security Incident response plan response to a Reportable Cyber
within 120 calendar days of a Security Incident. (Part 3.1.2)
test or actual incident response
OR
to a Reportable Cyber Security
The Responsible Entity did not
Incident. (Part 3.1.3)
update the Cyber Security
OR
Incident response plan(s) or
The Responsible Entity did not notified each person or group
update the Cyber Security with a defined role within 90
Page 14 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Violation Severity Levels (CIP-008-7)
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Incident response plan(s) or calendar days of any of the
notified each person or group following changes that the
with a defined role within 60 responsible entity determines
and less than 90 calendar days would impact the ability to
of any of the following changes execute the plan:
that the responsible entity
• Roles or responsibilities, or
determines would impact the
• Cyber Security Incident
ability to execute the plan:
response groups or
• Roles or responsibilities, or individuals, or
• Technology changes. (Part
• Cyber Security Incident
3.2)
response groups or
individuals, or
• Technology changes. (Part
3.2)
R4 The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
notify or update E-ISAC or CISA, notify E-ISAC or CISA, or their notify or update E-ISAC or CISA, notify E-ISAC and CISA, or their
or their successors, within the successors, of a Cyber Security or their successors, within the successors, of a Reportable
timelines pursuant to Part 4.2. Incident that was an attempt to timelines pursuant to Part 4.2. Cyber Security Incident.
(Part 4.2) compromise, as determined by (Part 4.2) (Requirement R4)
applying the criteria from
OR OR
Requirement R1, Part 1.2.1, a
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
system identified in the
report on one or more of the notify E-ISAC or CISA, or their
Applicable Systems column.
attributes within 7 days after successors, of a Reportable
(Requirement R4)
determination of the Cyber Security Incident.
attribute(s) not reported (Requirement R4)
pursuant to Part 4.1. (Part 4.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
report on one or more of the
attributes after determination
pursuant to Part 4.1. (Part 4.1)
Page 15 of 17
CIP-008-7 — Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Interpretations
None.
F. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-008-7 Technical Rationale
Page 16 of 17
CIP-008-7 - Cyber Security — Incident Reporting and Response Planning
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
R3.2 — Change “Control Center” to “control
1 1/16/06 3/24/06
center.”
Modifications to clarify the requirements and
to bring the compliance elements into
conformance with the latest guidelines for
developing compliance elements of
standards.
Removal of reasonable business judgment.
2 9/30/09
Replaced the RRO with the RE as a
Responsible Entity.
Rewording of Effective Date.
Changed compliance monitor to Compliance
Enforcement Authority.
Updated version number from -2 to -3
In Requirement 1.6, deleted the sentence
pertaining to removing component or system
3
from service in order to perform testing, in
response to FERC order issued September 30,
2009.
3 12/16/09 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
3 3/31/10 Approved by FERC.
Modified to add specific criteria for Critical
4 12/30/10 Update
Asset identification.
4 1/24/11 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Update
Modified to coordinate with
other CIP standards and to
5 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees.
revise format to use RBS
Template.
5 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-008-5.
CIP-008-5 Requirement R2,
FERC Letter Order issued approving VRFs and VSL table under Severe,
5 7/9/14
VSLs revisions to certain CIP standards. changed from 19 to 18
calendar months.
Modified to address
6 2/7/2019 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. directives in FERC Order No.
848
Virtualization Modifications
7 5/9/2024 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees
by Project 2016-02
Page 17 of 17
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-008-7.pdf ---

