--- START DOCUMENT: cip-010-5.pdf ---
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
A. Introduction
1. Title: Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability
Assessments
2. Number: CIP-010-5
3. Purpose: To prevent and detect unauthorized changes to BES Cyber Systems (BCS)
by specifying configuration change management and vulnerability
assessment requirements in support of protecting BCS from compromise
that could lead to misoperation or instability in the Bulk Electric System
(BES).
4. Applicability:
4.1. Functional Entities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the
following list of functional entities will be collectively referred to as “Responsible
Entities.” For requirements in this standard where a specific functional entity or
subset of functional entities are the applicable entity or entities, the functional
entity or entities are specified explicitly.
4.1.1. Balancing Authority
4.1.2. Distribution Provider that owns one or more of the following Facilities,
systems, and equipment for the protection or restoration of the BES:
4.1.2.1. Each underfrequency Load shedding (UFLS) or undervoltage
Load shedding (UVLS) system that:
4.1.2.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.1.2.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a common
control system owned by the Responsible Entity,
without human operator initiation, of 300 MW or
more.
4.1.2.2. Each Remedial Action Scheme (RAS) where the RAS is subject to
one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.1.2.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
Page 1 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
4.1.3. Generator Operator
4.1.4. Generator Owner
4.1.5. Reliability Coordinator
4.1.6. Transmission Operator
4.1.7. Transmission Owner
4.2. Facilities: For the purpose of the requirements contained herein, the following
Facilities, systems, and equipment owned by each Responsible Entity in Section 4.1
above are those to which these requirements are applicable. For requirements in
this standard where a specific type of Facilities, system, or equipment or subset of
Facilities, systems, and equipment are applicable, these are specified explicitly.
4.2.1. Distribution Provider: One or more of the following Facilities, systems
and equipment owned by the Distribution Provider for the protection or
restoration of the BES:
4.2.1.1. Each UFLS or UVLS System that:
4.2.1.1.1. is part of a Load shedding program that is subject
to one or more requirements in a NERC or Regional
Reliability Standard; and
4.2.1.1.2. performs automatic Load shedding under a
common control system owned by the Responsible
Entity, without human operator initiation, of 300
MW or more.
4.2.1.2. Each RAS where the RAS is subject to one or more requirements
in a NERC or Regional Reliability Standard.
4.2.1.3. Each Protection System (excluding UFLS and UVLS) that applies
to Transmission where the Protection System is subject to one
or more requirements in a NERC or Regional Reliability
Standard.
4.2.1.4. Each Cranking Path and group of Elements meeting the initial
switching requirements from a Blackstart Resource up to and
including the first interconnection point of the starting station
service of the next generation unit(s) to be started.
4.2.2. Responsible Entities listed in 4.1 other than Distribution Providers: All
BES Facilities.
4.2.3. Exemptions: The following are exempt from Standard CIP-010-5:
4.2.3.1. Cyber Systems at Facilities regulated by the Canadian Nuclear
Safety Commission.
4.2.3.2. Cyber Systems associated with communication networks and
Page 2 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
data communication links between discrete Electronic Security
Perimeters (ESP).
4.2.3.3. Cyber Systems, associated with communication networks and
data communication links, between Cyber Systems providing
confidentiality and integrity of an ESP that extends to one or
more geographic locations.
4.2.3.4. The systems, structures, and components that are regulated by
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission under a cyber security plan
pursuant to 10 C.F.R. Section 73.54.
4.2.3.5. For Distribution Providers, the systems and equipment that are
not included in section 4.2.1 above.
4.2.3.6. Responsible Entities that identify that they have no BES Cyber
Systems categorized as high impact or medium impact
according to the CIP-002 identification and categorization
processes.
4.3. “Applicable Systems”: Each table has an “Applicable Systems” column to define
the scope of systems to which a specific requirement part applies.
5. Effective Date: See “Project 2016-02 Modifications to CIP Standards Implementation
Plan.”
Page 3 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
B. Requirements and Measures
R1. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) to manage configuration changes,
individually or by group, that collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R1 –
Configuration Change Management. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M1. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
High impact BCS and their associated: Authorize changes that affect Applicable Examples of evidence may include, but are
1.1
Systems where those changes alter the not limited to, one or more documented
1. Electronic Access Control or
behavior of one or more cyber security process(es) that authorize changes that
Monitoring Systems (EACMS);
controls, excluding procedural and physical affect Applicable Systems where those
2. Physical Access Control Systems
controls, serving one or more requirement changes alter the behavior of one or more
(PACS); and
parts in CIP-005 or CIP-007, as defined by cyber security controls, excluding
3. Protected Cyber Asset (PCA) the Responsible Entity. procedural and physical controls, serving
one or more requirement parts in CIP-005
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
or CIP-007, as defined by the Responsible
1. EACMS;
Entity, such as:
2. PACS; and
• Change records documenting the
3. PCA
authorization.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this • Change records authorizing systems to
Part. automate changes to Applicable
Systems.
Examples of changes that may alter the
behavior of one or more cyber security
controls may include, but are not limited
to:
• Installation, removal, or update of
operating system, firmware, software,
or cyber security patches, including
changes to VCA parent images from
Page 4 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
which Applicable Systems will be
instantiated (CIP-007 R1.1, R2)
• Configuration changes that affect
routable protocol network accessibility
(CIP-007 R1.1)
• Configuration changes affecting the
establishment of, or access control
through, an ESP (CIP-005 R1, R2)
• Configuration of malicious code
prevention methods (CIP-007 R3)
• Configuration of security event
logging/alerting (CIP-007 R4)
• Configuration changes to
authentication methods (e.g., a
password enforcement policy change,
but not users changing their
password) (CIP-007 R5)
• Configuration changes to CPU/memory
sharing of VCAs on SCI (CIP-007 R1.3)
1.2 High impact BCS 1.2.1. Prior to implementing any change An example of evidence may include, but is
from Part 1.1 in the production not limited to, a list of cyber security
environment, except during a CIP controls tested along with successful test
Exceptional Circumstance, test the results and a list of differences between
changes in a test environment that the production and test environments with
minimizes differences with the descriptions of how any differences were
production environment or test the accounted for, including the date of the
changes in a production test, or logs from systems that
environment where the test is automatically remediate deviations in
performed in a manner that required cyber security controls in CIP-005
minimizes adverse effects, to ensure and CIP-007.
that required cyber security controls
in CIP-005 and CIP-007 are not
Page 5 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
adversely affected; and
1.2.2. Document the results of the testing
and, if a test environment was used,
the differences between the test
environment and the production
environment, including a description
of the measures used to account for
any differences in operation
between the test and production
environments.
1.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Prior to the installation of operating An example of evidence may include, but is
systems, firmware, software, or software not limited to a change request record that
1. EACMS; and
patches and when the method to do so is demonstrates the verification of identity of
2. PACS
available to the Responsible Entity from the the software source and integrity of the
Medium impact BCS and their associated: software source: software was performed prior to
1. EACMS; and installation or a process which documents
1.3.1. Verify the identity of the software
the mechanisms in place that would
2. PACS source; and
automatically ensure the identity of the
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this 1.3.2. Verify the integrity of the software software source and integrity of the
Part. obtained from the software source. software.
Note: Implementation does not require
the Responsible Entity to renegotiate or
abrogate existing contracts (including
amendments to master agreements and
purchase orders). Additionally, the
following issues are beyond the scope of
Part 1.6: (1) the actual terms and
conditions of a procurement contract; and
(2) vendor performance and adherence to
a contract.
Page 6 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R1 – Configuration Change Management
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
1.4 High impact BCS and their associated: As a part of the changes authorized per An example of evidence may include, but is
Part 1.1, verify that the behavior(s) of the not limited to:
1. EACMS;
altered cyber security controls were not
2. PACS; and • System generated evidence of
adversely affected.
automated verification of required
3. PCA
behaviors.
Medium impact BCS and their associated:
• Records from a verification process
1. EACMS;
showing that, as a part of the change
2. PACS; and
process, the required behavior(s) of the
3. PCA altered security controls remain
effective, were corrected, or the
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
change was reversed.
Part.
Page 7 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R2. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) to monitor configuration changes that
collectively include each of the applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring. [Violation
Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon: Operations Planning].
M2. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-5 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
Methods to monitor, per system capability,
2.1 High impact BES Cyber Systems and their An example of evidence may include, but
at least once every 35 calendar days, for
associated: is not limited to, documented methods to
unauthorized changes that affect
monitor at least once every 35 calendar
1. EACMS; and
Applicable Systems, where those changes
days. Monitoring system configuration or
2. PCA alter the behavior of one or more cyber
procedural controls demonstrating
security controls, excluding procedural and
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
monitoring of at least one cyber security
physical controls, serving one or more
Part. control for 2.1.1 through 2.1.7.
requirement parts in CIP-007, as defined by
the Responsible Entity; that include at least Examples of evidence may include, but are
one cyber security control for each of the not limited to, reports generated from
following: automated tools or manual reviews along
with records of investigation for any
2.1.1. Configuration on each Applicable
unauthorized changes that were detected.
System that affects its routable
protocol network accessibility; Note: monitoring of VCA parent images
from which Applicable Systems will be
2.1.2. Configuration of CPU or memory
instantiated is an example of an
sharing of VCAs on SCI;
automated control for 2.1.3.
2.1.3. Installation, removal, and update of
operating system, firmware,
software, and cyber security
patches.
2.1.4. Configuration of malicious code
protection methods;
Page 8 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R2 – Configuration Monitoring
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
2.1.5. Configuration of security event
logging or alerting;
2.1.6. Configuration of authentication
methods; and
2.1.7. Changes to the enabled or disabled
status of accounts.
Document and investigate detected
unauthorized changes.
Page 9 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
R3. Each Responsible Entity shall implement one or more documented process(es) that collectively include each of the
applicable requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R3– Vulnerability Assessments. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time
Horizon: Long-term Planning and Operations Planning]
M3. Evidence must include each of the applicable documented processes that collectively include each of the applicable
requirement parts in CIP-010-5 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments and additional evidence to demonstrate
implementation as described in the Measures column of the table.
CIP-010-5 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.1 High impact BES Cyber Systems and their At least once every 15 calendar months, Examples of evidence may include, but are
associated: conduct a paper or active vulnerability not limited to:
1. EACMS; assessment. • A document listing the date of the
2. PACS; and assessment (performed at least once
every 15 calendar months), the
3. PCA
controls assessed for each BES Cyber
Medium impact BES Cyber Systems and
System along with the method of
their associated:
assessment; or
1. EACMS;
• A document listing the date of the
2. PACS; and
assessment and the output of any
3. PCA
tools used to perform the assessment.
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
Part.
Page 10 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.2 High impact BES Cyber Systems. At least once every 36 calendar months, An example of evidence may include, but
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this per system capability: is not limited to, a document listing the
Part. 3.2.1 Perform an active vulnerability date of the assessment (performed at
assessment in a test environment least once every 36 calendar months), the
output of the tools used to perform the
that minimizes differences with the
assessment, and a list of differences
production environment, or perform
an active vulnerability assessment in between the production and test
a production environment where the environments with descriptions of how
test is performed in a manner that any differences were accounted for in
minimizes adverse effects; and conducting the assessment.
3.2.2 Document the results of the testing
and, if a test environment was used,
the differences between the test
environment and the production
environment, including a description
of the measures used to account for
any differences in operation
between the test and production
environments.
3.3 High impact BCS and their associated: Prior to becoming a new Applicable An example of evidence may include, but
1. EACMS; and System, perform an active vulnerability is not limited to:
assessment of the new Applicable System,
2. PCA • The output of tools used to perform
except for:
the assessment; or
SCI supporting an Applicable System in this
• Like replacements or additions with a
Part. • Reports from automated assessment
previously assessed configuration of
and remediation mechanisms
an existing Applicable System; or
(remediation VLANs, quarantine
• CIP Exceptional Circumstances. systems, 802.1x mechanisms that
assess and remediate, etc.)
that documents the date of the
assessment performed prior to becoming
a new Applicable System.
Page 11 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
CIP-010-5 Table R3 – Vulnerability Assessments
Part Applicable Systems Requirements Measures
3.4 High impact BCS and their associated: Document the results of the assessments Examples of evidence may include, but are
conducted according to Parts 3.1, 3.2, and not limited to:
1. EACMS;
3.3 and the action plan to remediate or
2. PACS; and • Reports or logs from automated
mitigate vulnerabilities identified in the
mechanisms that perform
3. PCA
assessments including the planned date of
remediation of VCAs at instantiation;
Medium impact BCS and their
completing the action plan and the execution
or
associated:
status of any remediation or mitigation
• Documentation listing the results or
1. EACMS; action items.
the review or assessment, a list of
2. PACS; and
action items, documented proposed
3. PCA
dates of completion for the action
SCI supporting an Applicable System in plan, and records of the status of the
this Part. action items (such as minutes of a
status meeting, updates in a work
order system, or a spreadsheet
tracking the action items).
R4. Each Responsible Entity, for its high impact and medium impact BES Cyber Systems, associated PCA, and associated SCI,
shall implement, except under CIP Exceptional Circumstances, one or more documented plan(s) for Transient Cyber Assets
(TCA) and Removable Media that include the sections in Attachment 1. [Violation Risk Factor: Medium] [Time Horizon:
Long-term Planning and Operations Planning]
M4. Evidence shall include each of the documented plan(s) for TCAs and Removable Media that collectively include each of the
applicable sections in Attachment 1 and additional evidence to demonstrate implementation of plan(s) for TCA and
Removable Media. Additional examples of evidence per section are located in Attachment 2. If a Responsible Entity does
not use TCA(s) or Removable Media, examples of evidence include, but are not limited to, a statement, policy, or other
document that states the Responsible Entity does not use TCA(s) or Removable Media.
Page 12 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
C. Compliance
1. Compliance Monitoring Process
1.1. Compliance Enforcement Authority: “Compliance Enforcement Authority”
(CEA) means NERC or the Regional Entity, or any entity as otherwise
designated by an Applicable Governmental Authority, in their respective
roles of monitoring and/or enforcing compliance with mandatory and
enforceable Reliability Standards in their respective jurisdictions.
1.2. Evidence Retention: The following evidence retention period(s) identify the
period of time an entity is required to retain specific evidence to
demonstrate compliance. For instances where the evidence retention period
specified below is shorter than the time since the last audit, the CEA may ask
an entity to provide other evidence to show that it was compliant for the full-
time period since the last audit.
The applicable entity shall keep data or evidence to show compliance as
identified below unless directed by its CEA to retain specific evidence for a
longer period of time as part of an investigation.
• Each applicable entity shall retain evidence of each requirement in this
standard for three calendar years.
• If an applicable entity is found non-compliant, it shall keep information
related to the non-compliance until mitigation is complete and approved
or for the time specified above, whichever is longer.
• The CEA shall keep the last audit records and all requested and
submitted subsequent audit records.
1.3. Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program: As defined in the NERC
Rules of Procedure, “Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement Program”
refers to the identification of the processes that will be used to evaluate data
or information for the purpose of assessing performance or outcomes with
the associated Reliability Standard.
Page 13 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
The Responsible Entity’s The Responsible Entity change
R1. The Responsible Entity neither
change management management process(es) did
documented nor implemented
process(es) does not include not include authorization for
any change management
one of the required items changes as required in Part
process(es) that include
listed in 1.2.1 through 1.2.2. 1.1. (Part 1.1)
required items in Part 1.1
(Requirement R1 Part 1.2);
OR through Part 1.4.
OR (Requirement R1)
The Responsible Entity’s
The Responsible Entity’s change management
change management process(es) does not include
process(es) does not include the two required items listed
one of the required items in 1.2.1 through 1.2.2. (Part
listed in 1.3.1 through 1.3.2. 1.2);
(Part 1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity’s
change management
process(es) does not include
the two required items listed
in 1.3.1 through 1.3.2. (Part
1.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity’s
change management
process(es) does not include
verification, as required by
Part 1.4. (Part 1.4)
The Responsible Entity’s The Responsible Entity’s The Responsible Entity neither
R2. The Responsible Entity did not
documented and implemented documented and implemented documented nor implemented
monitor within 35 calendar
configuration monitoring configuration monitoring a configuration monitoring
days, but less than 70 calendar
process(es) does not include process(es) does not include process(es); or the process
days as required by Part 2.1.
one or two of the required three or four of the required does not include five or more
Page 14 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
Parts 2.1.1 through 2.1.7 for Parts 2.1.1 through 2.1.7 for of the required Parts 2.1.1
Applicable Systems as required Applicable Systems as required through 2.1.7 for Applicable
in Part 2.1. in Part 2.1. Systems as required in Part
2.1.
OR OR
OR
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
monitor within 70 calendar monitor within 105 calendar The Responsible Entity did not
days, but less than 105 days, but less than 140 monitor within 140 calendar
calendar days as required by calendar days as required by days or more as required by
Part 2.1. Part 2.1. Part 2.1.
OR
The Responsible Entity neither
documented nor investigated
detected unauthorized
changes. (Part 2.1)
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity did not
R3.
performed a vulnerability performed a vulnerability performed a vulnerability implement any vulnerability
assessment more than 15 assessment more than 18 assessment more than 21 assessment processes for one
months, but less than 18 months, but less than 21 months, but less than 24 of its Applicable Systems.
months, since the last months, since the last months, since the last (Requirement R3)
assessment on one of its assessment on one of its assessment on one of its
OR
Applicable Systems. (Part 3.1) Applicable Systems. (Part 3.1) Applicable Systems. (Part 3.1)
The Responsible Entity
OR OR OR
performed a vulnerability
The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity The Responsible Entity assessment more than 24
performed an active performed an active performed an active months since the last
vulnerability assessment more vulnerability assessment more vulnerability assessment more assessment on one of its
than 36 months, but less than than 39 months, but less than than 42 months, but less than applicable BES Cyber Systems.
39 months, since the last 42 months, since the last 45 months, since the last (Part 3.1)
active assessment on one of its active assessment on one of its active assessment on one of its
OR
Applicable Systems. (Part 3.2) Applicable Systems. (Part 3.2) Applicable Systems. (Part 3.2)
The Responsible Entity
performed an active
vulnerability assessment more
Page 15 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
than 45 months since the last
active assessment on one of its
applicable BES Cyber Systems.
(Part 3.2)
OR
The Responsible Entity did not
perform the active
vulnerability assessment of a
Cyber System prior to it
becoming an Applicable
Systems. (Part 3.3)
OR
The Responsible Entity has
implemented one or more
documented vulnerability
assessment processes for each
of its Applicable Systems, but
has not documented the
results of the vulnerability
assessments, the action plans
to remediate or mitigate
vulnerabilities identified in the
assessments, the planned date
of completion of the action
plan, and the execution status
of the mitigation plans. (Part
3.4)
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
R4. The Responsible Entity did not
manage its Transient Cyber implement the Removable authorize its TCA(s) according
document or implement one
Asset(s) according to Media sections according to to Attachment 1, Section 1.2.
or more plan(s) for TCAs and
Attachment 1, Section 1.1. Attachment 1, Section 3. (R4)
Removable Media according to
(Requirement R4) (Requirement R4)
Page 16 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Violation Severity Levels
R #
Lower VSL Moderate VSL High VSL Severe VSL
OR OR OR Requirement R4. (Requirement
R4)
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
document the Removable document mitigation of implement mitigation of
Media sections according to software vulnerabilities, software vulnerabilities,
Attachment 1, Section 3. mitigation for the introduction mitigation for the introduction
(Requirement R4) of malicious code, or of malicious code, or
mitigation of the risk of mitigation of the risk of
OR
unauthorized use for TCA unauthorized use for TCAs
The Responsible Entity did not
managed by the Responsible managed by the Responsible
document authorization for
Entity according to Attachment Entity according to Attachment
TCA managed by the
1, Sections 1.3, 1.4, and 1.5. 1, Sections 1.3, 1.4, and 1.5.
Responsible Entity according to
(Requirement R4) (Requirement R4)
Attachment 1, Section 1.2.
OR OR
(Requirement R4)
The Responsible Entity did not The Responsible Entity did not
document mitigation of implement mitigation of
software vulnerabilities or software vulnerabilities or
mitigation for the introduction mitigation for the introduction
of malicious code for Transient of malicious code for TCAs
Cyber Assets managed by a managed by a party other than
party other than the the Responsible Entity
Responsible Entity according to according to Attachment 1,
Attachment 1, Sections 2.1, Sections 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3.
2.2, and 2.3. (Requirement R4) (Requirement R4)
D. Regional Variances
None.
E. Associated Documents
• Implementation Plan for Project 2016-02
• CIP-010-5 Technical Rationale
Page 17 of 24
CIP-010-5 – Cyber Security — Configuration Change Management and Vulnerability Assessments
Version History
Version Date Action Change Tracking
1 11/26/12 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Developed to define the
configuration change
management and vulnerability
assessment requirements in
coordination with other CIP
standards and to address the
balance of the FERC directives in
its Order 706.
1 11/22/13 FERC Order issued approving CIP-010-1.
(Order becomes effective on 2/3/14.)
2 11/13/14 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Addressed two FERC directives
from Order No. 791 related to
identify, assess, and correct
language and communication
networks.
2 2/12/15 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Replaces the version adopted by
the Board on 11/13/2014. Revised
version addresses remaining
directives from Order No. 791
related to transient devices and
low impact BES Cyber Systems.
2 1/21/16 FERC Order issued approving CIP-010-3.
Docket No. RM15-14-000
3 08/10/17 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address certain
directives in FERC Order No. 829.
3 10/18/2018 FERC Order approving CIP-010-3. Docket
No. RM17-13-000.
4 11/05/2020 Adopted by the NERC Board of Trustees. Modified to address directives in
FERC Order No. 850.
4 3/18/2021 FERC order approving Docket No. RD21-
2-000
5 5/9/2024 Approved by the NERC Board of Trustees. Virtualization Modifications under
Project 2016-02
Page 18 of 24
Attachment
Attachment 1
Required Sections for Plans for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media
Responsible Entities shall include each of the sections provided below in their plan(s) for
Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media as required under Requirement R4.
Section 1. TCA(s) Managed by the Responsible Entity.
1.1. TCA Management: Responsible Entities shall manage TCA(s), individually or
by group: (1) in an ongoing manner to ensure compliance with applicable
requirements at all times, (2) in an on-demand manner applying the
applicable requirements before connection, or (3) a combination of both (1)
and (2) above.
1.2. TCA Authorization: For each individual or group of TCA(s), each Responsible
Entity shall authorize:
1.2.1. Users, either individually or by group or role;
1.2.2. Locations, either individually or by group; and
1.2.3. Uses, which shall be limited to what is necessary to perform business
functions.
1.3. Software Vulnerability Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the following
methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of vulnerabilities
posed by unpatched software on the TCA (per TCA capability):
• Security patching, including manual or managed updates;
• System hardening; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities.
1.4. Introduction of Malicious Code Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of
introduction of malicious code (per TCA capability):
• Antivirus software, including manual or managed updates of signatures
or patterns;
• Application whitelisting;
• Live operating system and software executable only from read only
media;
• System hardening; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code.
1.5. Unauthorized Use Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the following
methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of unauthorized use
of TCA(s):
Page 19 of 24
Attachment
• Restrict physical access;
• Full-disk encryption with authentication;
• Multi-factor authentication; or
• Other method(s) to mitigate the risk of unauthorized use.
Section 2. TCA(s) Managed by a Party Other than the Responsible Entity.
2.1. Software Vulnerabilities Mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of
vulnerabilities posed by unpatched software on the TCA (per TCA capability):
• Review of installed security patch(es);
• Review of security patching process used by the party;
• Review of other vulnerability mitigation performed by the party; or
• Review of other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities.
2.2. Introduction of malicious code mitigation: Use one or a combination of the
following methods to achieve the objective of mitigating the risk of
introduction of malicious code (per TCA capability):
• Review of antivirus update level;
• Review of antivirus update process used by the party;
• Review of application whitelisting used by the party;
• Review use of live operating system and software executable only from
read only media;
• Review of system hardening used by the party; or
• Review of other method(s) to mitigate the risk of introduction of
malicious code.
2.3. For any method used as specified in 2.1 and 2.2, Responsible Entities shall
determine whether any additional mitigation actions are necessary and
implement such actions prior to connecting the TCA.
Section 3. Removable Media
3.1. Removable Media Authorization: For each individual or group of Removable
Media, each Responsible Entity shall authorize:
3.1.1. Users, either individually or by group or role; and
3.1.2. Locations, either individually or by group.
3.2. Malicious Code Mitigation: To achieve the objective of mitigating the threat
of introducing malicious code, each Responsible Entity shall:
Page 20 of 24
Attachment
3.2.1. Use method(s) to detect malicious code on Removable Media prior to
connecting ; and
3.2.2. Mitigate the threat of detected malicious code.
Page 21 of 24
Attachment
CIP-010-5 - Attachment 2
Examples of Evidence for Plans for Transient Cyber Assets and Removable Media
Section 1.1: Examples of evidence for Section 1.1 may include, but are not limited to, the
method(s) of management for the TCA(s). This can be included as part of the TCA(s),
part of the documentation related to authorization of TCA(s) managed by the
Responsible Entity or part of a security policy.
Section 1.2: Examples of evidence for Section 1.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from asset management systems, human resource management
systems, or forms or spreadsheets that show authorization of TCA(s) managed by
the Responsible Entity. Alternatively, this can be documented in the overarching
plan document.
Section 1.3: Examples of evidence for Section 1.3 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the risk of software vulnerabilities
posed by unpatched software such as security patch management implementation,
the use of live operating system and software executable only from read only media,
the use of controls that maintain the state of the operating system and software
such that it is in a known state prior to execution, system hardening practices or
other method(s) to mitigate the risk of software vulnerability posed by unpatched
software. Evidence can be from change management systems, automated patch
management solutions, procedures or processes associated with using live
operating systems, methods to maintain the known good state of the OS and all
software, or system hardening practices. If a TCA does not have the capability to use
method(s) that mitigate the risk from unpatched software, evidence may include
documentation by the vendor or Responsible Entity that identifies that the TCA does
not have the capability.
Section 1.4: Examples of evidence for Section 1.4 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation of the method(s) used to mitigate the introduction of malicious code
such as antivirus software and processes for managing signature or pattern updates,
application whitelisting practices, processes to restrict communication, or other
method(s) to mitigate the introduction of malicious code. If a Transient Cyber Asset
does not have the capability to use method(s) that mitigate the introduction of
malicious code, evidence may include documentation by the vendor or Responsible
Entity that identifies that the TCA does not have the capability.
Section 1.5: Examples of evidence for Section 1.5 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation through policies or procedures of the method(s) to restrict physical
access; method(s) of the full-disk encryption solution along with the authentication
protocol; method(s) of the multi-factor authentication solution; or documentation
of other method(s) to mitigate the risk of unauthorized use.
Section 2.1: Examples of evidence for Section 2.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or procedures
that document a review of installed security patch(es); memoranda, electronic mail,
Page 22 of 24
Attachment
policies or contracts from parties other than the Responsible Entity that identify the
security patching process or vulnerability mitigation performed by the party other
than the Responsible Entity; memoranda, electronic mail, policies or contracts from
parties other than the Responsible Entity that that document a review of the use of
live operating system and software executable only from read only media;
memoranda, electronic mail, policies, or contracts from parties other than the
Responsible Entity that that document a review of the use of controls that maintain
the state of the operating system and software such that it is in a known state prior
to execution; evidence from change management systems, electronic mail, system
documentation or contracts that identifies acceptance by the Responsible Entity
that the practices of the party other than the Responsible Entity are acceptable; or
documentation of other method(s) to mitigate software vulnerabilities for TCA(s)
managed by a party other than the Responsible Entity. If a TCA does not have the
capability to use method(s) that mitigate the risk from unpatched software,
evidence may include documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party other
than the Responsible Entity that identifies that the TCA does not have the capability.
Section 2.2: Examples of evidence for Section 2.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail or procedures
that document a review of the installed antivirus update level; memoranda,
electronic mail, system documentation, policies or contracts from the party other
than the Responsible Entity that identify the antivirus update process, the use of
application whitelisting, and system hardening by the party other than the
Responsible Entity; evidence from change management systems, electronic mail or
contracts that identifies the Responsible Entity’s acceptance that the practices of
the party other than the Responsible Entity are acceptable; or documentation of
other method(s) to mitigate malicious code for TCA(s) managed by a party other
than the Responsible Entity. If a TCA does not have the capability to use method(s)
that mitigate the introduction of malicious code, evidence may include
documentation by the Responsible Entity or the party other than the Responsible
Entity that identifies that the TCA does not have the capability.
Section 2.3: Examples of evidence for Section 2.3 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from change management systems, electronic mail, or contracts
that identifies a review to determine whether additional mitigations are necessary
and that they have been implemented prior to connecting the TCA managed by a
party other than the Responsible Entity.
Section 3.1: Examples of evidence for Section 3.1 may include, but are not limited to,
documentation from asset management systems, human resource management
systems, forms or spreadsheets that shows authorization of Removable Media. The
documentation must identify Removable Media, individually or by group of
Removable Media, along with the authorized users, either individually or by group
or role, and the authorized locations, either individually or by group.
Page 23 of 24
Attachment
Section 3.2: Examples of evidence for Section 3.2 may include, but are not limited to,
documented process(es) of the method(s) used to mitigate malicious code such as
results of scan settings for Removable Media, or implementation of on-demand
scanning. Documented process(es) for the method(s) used for mitigating the threat
of detected malicious code on Removable Media, such as logs from the method(s)
used to detect malicious code that show the results of scanning and that show
mitigation of detected malicious code on Removable Media or documented
confirmation by the entity that the Removable Media was deemed to be free of
malicious code.
Page 24 of 24
--- END DOCUMENT: cip-010-5.pdf ---

